--- DNA Mini Kit (QIAGEN Co., Ltd., USA). ---

5

and the updated data were used for the analysis. These data were visualized by heatmapping
and subjected to association analysis and SEM analysis, as described later.

DNA extraction from soil
The soil was collected after harvesting, and 5 g of each soil sample was added to a 15 mL
tube. Five milliliters of sterile water were added, the soil was well suspended by vortexing,
and the filtrate was filtered through filter paper (Advantech 5C) (Advantech Co., Ltd.,
USA) and collected in a new 15 mL tube. DNA was extracted with a QIAGEN Power Soil
DNA Mini Kit (QIAGEN Co., Ltd., USA).

Meta sequence analysis of bacterial 16S rRNA gene sequences
As previously reported 70, the V1-2 region of the bacterial 16S rRNA gene (27fmod-338r)
was sequenced according to a previous report70. The amplified fragments were sequenced
on an Illumina MiSeq system following the manufacturer’s instructions. The paired-end
reads were merged using the fastq-join program based on overlapping sequences. Reads
showing an average quality value of <25 and inexact matches to both universal primers
were filtered out. Filter-passed reads were used for further analysis after trimming both
primer sequences. The quality filter-passed reads of each sample were rearranged in
descending order according to the corresponding quality values and then clustered into
OTUs with a 97% pairwise identity cutoff using the UCLUST program, version 5.2.32
(https://www.drive5.com). The taxonomic assignment of each OTU was performed based
on similarity searches against the Ribosomal Database Project (RDP) and the National
Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) genome database using the GLSEARCH
program. α-diversity indices of community richness (Chao1) and diversity (Shannon and
Simpson) were calculated, and β-diversity indices were estimated via UniFrac analysis
with weighted and unweighted principal coordinate analysis (PCoA). All 16S rRNA gene
datasets were deposited in the GenBank Sequence Read Archive database as described in
Data availability. Phylogenetic trees were constructed on the basis of the mash distance
using neighbor-joining method as previously described71,72.

Association analyses
Association analysis is a technically established, elementary method of unsupervised
learning that is also used for market research as a type of market basket analysis and is
applied to achieve an understanding beyond the logic of numbers using relative numbers
73-76. It is easy to apply when missing values are a characteristic of association analysis.
Therefore, it may be a suitable approach when conditions are set such that the identity for
classification is different for each categorized layer, for example, when metabolomic data
and microbial population are analyzed. It can identify and classify associated components
by subjecting them to conditions in which it is challenging to make horizontal comparisons.
To predict the components associated with compost, an association analysis was performed
as previously reported73-76. In brief, association analysis is an elementary way to infer an
effect (“target”) from a cause (“source”). In this case, the “source” and “target” are
represented as x and y, respectively, and the calculation factors for probability (P) are
defined as follows:
support (x ⇒ y) = P(x ∩ y)
“support” is P(xy), joint probability (P) of co-occurrence