--- Carrot seeds (Takii Seeds Phytorich Series, Kyo ---

Introduction
Global food shortages are an urgent issue, and
malnutrition remains a major cause of death in some
areas. In addition, because deficiencies in trace
components cause many diseases, it is necessary to
develop innovative agricultural technologies to increase
crop production and nutritional value 1-3.
The planetary boundary framework 4 has emphasized
the deterioration of biodiversity and available nitrogen
and phosphorus. Traditionally, chemical fertilizers have
been considered essential and distributed in agriculture,
but this approach has increased the burden on
ecosystems
5,6. Furthermore, recent studies have
shown that amino acids are more critical to plants than
inorganic nitrogen 5. In this context, the importance of
organic farming should be reconsidered 7,8. Recycling
agriculture is essential to meet the goal of sustainable
development
by
efficiently
using
nitrogen
and
phosphorus 8,9. However, there is a history of contention
about how the quality of organic compost affects crops
in many respects 10. Furthermore, the roles of compost
in different stages of an ecosystem appear to depend on
the environmental conditions 8,11,12. In general, the
quality of composts seems to be unstable because
several different types of raw materials are fermented
under
uncertain
fermentation
conditions
within
composts 13-15, e.g., the contents of fermentation
bacteria and moisture and other conditions of the
fermentation process may vary. Therefore, although
there is an assumption of the effectiveness of compost
in resource recycling, it contains uncertainty due to the
unstable characteristics of compost fermentation.
Studies on thermostable and thermophilic Bacillus
species, which may be involved in stable composting
and plant health contributors as plant growth-promoting
bacteria (PGPB) candidates, have been reported16-18.
Miyamoto, Kodama, and their joint research group have
reported PGPB with antifungal activity 19 in a compost
model: it was produced at high temperature (over 70 ℃
as spontaneous fermentation) with marine animal
resources (MAR compost) in a fed-batch system of
bioreactors containing a thermophilic Bacillaceae as
stable fermentation bacterial community19. Interestingly,
the compost had a strain that played the role of PGPB
with antifungal activity 19 and reduced the accumulation
of plant nitrate by denitrifying activity in soils 20.
Furthermore, oral administration of compost or its
extract
and
the
compost-derived
thermophile
Bacillaceae can improve the fecundity and quality of
rodent animal models, fisheries and livestock animals 21-
27. Under in vitro anaerobic conditions, Tashiro and
Sakai et al. demonstrated that compost and its derived
thermophilic Bacillus efficiently produced optically pure
L-lactate (100% optical purity) from nonsterilized kitchen
refuse
28-31 or starch as a material
30. These
observations, including the findings of our research
groups, suggest that Bacillaceae in compost may stably
change the structure and function of symbiotic bacteria
and their habitats.
Here, we aim to assess compost-soil-plant interactions
using carrots. This crop model allows easy analysis of
portions above and below the ground after exposure to
this thermophilic Bacillaceae-fermented compost and to
explore the active bacterial groups. Multiple omics
analysis has been used as an innovative method for
various research objects 5,32. Using integrated analyses
of multiple omics datasets, including plant and soil
metabolome and microbiome (Fig. S1), we classified
components linked to carrot productivity, color matrix,
and taste indices. The covariance structural analysis with
the classified components statistically estimated the
multiple regression models between plant growth indices,
plant and soil metabolites, and the soil microbiota. Based
on the regression model, it was inferred that
Paenibacillus strains as nitrogen-fixing bacteria are
involved in the effect of compost. After these estimates,
the isolation, genome analysis, and evaluation of the
biological activity of compost-derived Paenibacillus
strains were advanced. As a result, the possibility that the
calculation hypothesis was properly taken into account
was anticipated. Using these computational procedures
to advance biochemical experiments has effectively
assessed the complex relationship between soil, plants,
and compost. The information from this study could
provide an essential perspective for the construction of
sustainable agricultural technologies in the future.

Materials and Methods
Carrot seeds (Takii Seeds Phytorich Series, Kyo
Kurenai, Takii Seeds Co., Ltd.) were sown in two
rows located 5 cm apart on the cultivation area, and
the rows were covered with nonwoven fabric after
sowing. The plants were harvested twice, in
November and February, and their stem and leaf
weight, root weight, root diameter, root length, color,
taste, the metabolites, and anti-oxidant activities
were measured. Soil was collected after harvesting,
the metabolites and bacterial populations were
investigated. On the basis of the omics data,
correlation analyses, association analyses 33,34 were
performed.
Furthermore,
covariance
structure
analysis/structural
equation
modeling
(SEM),
causal
mediation
analysis
(CMA),
and
BayesLiNGAM were performed as previously
described
34. Based on the predicted model,
functional bacterial candidates from compost were
isolated, genomic analysis was performed, and
biological activity was measured. The F test of the
data was used to select parametric and non-
parametric analyses. The unpaired t-test and
Wilcoxon test were selected as appropriate
methods depending on the data sets. Significance
was declared when P < 0.05, and a trend was
assumed at 0.05 ≤ P < 0.20. These calculated data
were prepared using R software and Prism software
(version 9.1.2) and were visualized using an
estimation plot or entering replicates in a data graph.
Data are presented as the means ± SEs. Detailed