--- Page 2 ---

Agronomy 2024, 14, 2423 2 of 15 and greenhouse gases to a circular economic model that can reduce agriculture’s waste by reusing all products and byproducts to generate additional value in a closed system. This is possible because circular agriculture is built around four main pillars, which are (a) a closed- loop waste-free agricultural production system, (b) the maximal use of renewable resources, (c) optimal resource usage and (d) the preservation and enhancement of complexity and biodiversity. These pillars define the circularity principle in agriculture [3].

With the first pillar of a closed-loop waste-free agricultural production system, this approach mimics the natural cycle of nutrient use and recycling, thereby promoting sustain- ability. It seeks to add to the soil through a self-nourishing ecological system that benefits the environment by transforming all waste into reusable materials such as organic manure.

In this system, nutrients are recycled from waste generated along the food chain, which later is converted into organic fertilizers to produce crops or for energy recovery such as biogas. In this way, the system works by focusing on maximal nutrient use efficiency and quality rather than quantity. Ideally, there would be no more acreage or resources are used than is strictly necessary in any circular agricultural system.

Using renewable resources such as residues of agricultural biomass, food processing waste and municipal and industrial sewage sludge for additional purposes within the agricultural production system is another central principle of circularity in agriculture.

Renewable resources such as the previous season’s crop biomass returned to the soil, for example, will reverse or at least reduce the rate of nutrient mining, leading, in turn, to a reduction in external inputs, such as chemical fertilizers. On the other hand, crop residues may be used as feedstock for livestock, from which manure can be applied back to the soil to resupply nutrients. This will also reduce the need for external chemical fertilizers in the agricultural production system. Field leftovers such as protein-rich beetroot tops [4], fodder beets [5] or legume leaves are incorporated into livestock feedstock instead of treating them as waste. Optimal resource usage is a necessary undertaking in circular agriculture because the result is extra profits per unit input of resources. It focuses on resource optimization through the adoption of techniques such as precision farming, efficient irrigation systems and integrated nutrient and pest management. In this article, we describe the available techniques that use the principles of circularity in agriculture and discuss the various ways in which farming communities across the continent are utilizing these techniques to sus- tainably produce using finite resources. We highlight further opportunities and challenges regarding efforts to embrace circular agricultural principles in African agriculture and the interconnection existing between circular agricultural practices and the restoration of soil health.

A closely related approach to sustainable agricultural production is regenerative agriculture—an approach that focuses on restoring and enhancing soil health, biodiversity and ecosystem services by emphasizing practices that lead to the restoration of degraded soils, including cover cropping, crop rotation, minimal tillage and the use of organic amend- ments to improve the soil fertility and structure. In other words, the focus of regenerative agriculture is the overall goal of regenerating degraded land, increasing water retention, sequestering carbon and promoting overall ecological balance [6,7]. This is in a complete convergence with one of circular agriculture principles, namely the promotion of activities that lead to the recycling of all renewable resources, resulting in a reduction in the rate of nutrient mining while curtailing the need for external inputs into the soil. This, in turn, makes the two approaches of regenerative agriculture and circular agriculture comple- mentary to one another, as the principles of regenerative agriculture, such as soil health improvement and biodiversity conservation, can be integrated into circular agriculture practices to create more sustainable and resilient food systems.

There exists scant information on how and to what extent African agriculture deploys the principles and practices of circular regenerative agriculture to sustainably produce food and reduce environmental degradation. In this review, we examine the extent, range and nature of the practices deployed in agricultural production across Africa. We explore how such practices help to sustainably use the finite resources to achieve food security and