--- Tindwa, Sokoine University of Agriculture). ---

Agronomy 2024, 14, 2423
5 of 15
addition to increasing the biodiversity of beneficial organisms such as soil microorganisms
and insects [56].
Figure 1 above depicts a mixed cropping system, commonly practiced in Tanzania,
consisting of two or more nitrogen-fixing crops. Groundnuts and pigeon peas are used to
improve the soil’s fertility status and as cover cropping (groundnuts) that helps to keep
the perennial crop (cashew nut trees, in this case) clear of weeds and reduce the threat
of wildfires.

Figure 1. Example of mixed cropping practice involving one perennial tree crop—cashew nuts—and
two annual legumes—groundnuts and pigeon peas—in Southern Tanzania. (Photo by Hamsi J.
Tindwa, Sokoine University of Agriculture).
Bioenergy is any form of energy from biomass materials and it ranges from solid
primary energy (fire wood, charcoal and combustible waste) and gases (biogas and biohy-
drogen) to liquid fuels (bioethanol and bioenergy) [27]. Some forms of bioenergy, such as
biogas or liquid biofuels, can be directly applied to aid agricultural production. The use
of biogas as fuel for farmstead cooking and steam production to aid electricity generation
has been documented in several parts of sub-Saharan Africa, including Kenya [57] and
Zimbabwe [58]. In 2017, for example, a commercial vegetable and flower farm in Naivasha,
Kenya was reported to be the first in Africa to generate electricity from biogas and connect
the surplus to the national grid, thereby contributing to efforts to reduce carbon emissions
from oil-powered generation [58,59]. A different study by Söderberg [60] has documented
the high potential for electricity generation from biogas digestion plants scattered across
the country, which could contribute to the national electricity grid.
Kenya also possesses the first agrovoltaic system, which helps to harvest solar energy
for the farm; here, solar panels are constructed that are several meters high, with gaps
between them so that crops can still be grown underneath, while generating electricity