--- 5. Restoration of Soil Health through Circular Regenerative Agricultural Practices: ---

Agronomy 2024, 14, 2423
9 of 15
concept, a start-up company in Tanzania, called Afri-EcoFeeds, works to process up to
50,000 megatons of food waste peels and trimmings and produce about 1000 megatons
of animal feed per year, serving about 2000 animal farmers in the Manyara and Arusha
regions of Tanzania [82]. Similarly, a local company in Tanzania called Chanzi purchases
unwanted food waste from smallholder farmers, commercial farms, urban markets and
businesses to convert them into protein-rich animal feed additives using black soldier
fly larvae. It then sells the feed additives to livestock, poultry and fish farmers; agro-
dealers; and feed mills across Tanzania and Kenya [83]. A similar company in Uganda
(Ugavoil), in partnership with the Kasese Municipal Council, uses black soldier flies to
convert organic waste collected from various points around the Kasese Municipality to
produce both organic farm inputs and animal feed [84].
5. Restoration of Soil Health through Circular Regenerative Agricultural Practices:
Selected Examples for Extensification in Africa
The soil is known to provide multiple ecosystem services, leading to the sustainable
functioning of the ecosystem, which directly affects human health and agricultural produc-
tivity [85]. As a substrate for plant growth, the soil is essential in sustaining plant vigor
and growth and in the regulation of water dynamics and carbon sequestration [86], all of
which contribute to a healthy soil ecosystem. In other words, healthy soil is the result of
an interconnected web of activities involving soil organisms and organic matter as they
are modified by agronomic practices. Healthy soil must have the capacity to provide an
environment for the optimum growth and development of plants and thus support the
health of animals and humans. Therefore, the circular regenerative agricultural practices
summarized in Figure 2 can invariably be used to positively moderate and modify the soil
content and its potential for the emission of toxic greenhouse gases into the atmosphere [87].

Figure 2. Summary of circular regenerative agricultural practices used to restore soil health in
degraded soils in African agriculture. Red cycles show the alternative regenerative agricultural
practices that can be applied on degraded soils, yellow cycles show the possible results of the
practices leading to restoration of soil health- green cycles.
Composting is one practice that employs circular agricultural principles to restore
soil health. This act of transforming organic matter, including food waste, kitchen scraps
and agricultural residues, into nutrient-rich compost is a powerful tool to replenish soil