--- aminoadipate; S_N, nicotinamide; S_M, ---

Figure and Table legends
Fig. 1 (a) Cultivation schedule. (b) Evaluated growth
indices of carrots. (c) Photograph of harvested carrots.
(d) The procedure for color assessment. (e) Values of
RGB pixel indices in the tested carrots. (f) Results of
taste evaluation. The asterisks show as follows: *,
p<0.05; **, p<0.01.

Fig. 2. The antioxidant activity in the leaves and roots of
carrots and heatmaps of correlation between the
categories belonging to metabolite candidates. (a)
DPPH (2,2-diphenyl-1-picrylhydrazyl) activities in the
leaf and root of the carrot (n=5). The “Control” and
“Compost” show the data under normal conditions
(control group) and compost-amended conditions
(compost group), respectively. (b)(c)(d) Metabolic
differences in the leaf, root, and soil. Heatmaps show
the relative abundances of the metabolites in each
cluster: the control (blue) and test groups (compost-
amended group)(red).The representative metabolites in
the leaf and the root in each group are shown
(comparison of the categories belonging to metabolites
with p < 0.1 as significant values). The metabolites in the
soil are shown (comparison of the categories belonging
to metabolites with p < 0.2 as significant values).
Significan t values were shown as follows: *, p<0.05;
and **, p<0.01.

Fig. 3. (a) UniFrac graph (unweighted and weighted)
showing β-diversity in the control and test groups. The
estimation plot of the bacterial population in the soil of
the control and test groups. Relative abundances of the
(b) phyla and (c) genera (p <0.1; >0.1% as the maximum
of bacterial population).

Fig. 4. The relationship of the leaf and root metabolite
candidates associated with compost amendment was
visualized by structural equation modeling in the
regression groups selected in Tables S1 and S2.
Standardized β coefficients are reported. The green and
red colors show positive and negative interactions,
respectively. (a) shows the sempath linked with amino
acids, carotenoids, flavonoids, DPPH activity, and
compost. (b) shows the sempath linked with apigenin 7-
O-neohesperidoside,
kaempferol-Gal-Rha,
and
quercetin Glc as flavonoids in the leaf and L-2-
aminoadipate and phenylalanine in the root and
compost. (c) shows the sempah linked with soil
metabolites,
Paenibacillus,
and
compost.The
abbreviations are as follows: Cmp, compost; L_AA, total
amino acid contents in the leaf; L_Fav, total flavonoid
contents in the leaf; L_DPP, DPPH activities in the leaf;
R_Car, total carotenoid contents in the root; L_Apig,
apigenin 7-O-neohesperidoside in the leaf; L_Kae,
kaempferol-Gal-Rha in the leaf; L_Que, quercerin Glc in
the leaf; R_L2A, L-2-aminoadipate in the root; R_Phe,
phenylalanine in the root; Pnb, Paenibacillus; S_A, L-2
aminoadipate; S_N, nicotinamide; S_M, S-methyl L-
cysteine. The fit indices are shown in the path as follows:
Chiq, chi-square χ2; p value, p values (chi-square); CFI,
comparative fit index; TLI, Tucker–Lewis index; RMSEA,
root mean square error of approximation; SRMR,
standardized root mean residual; GFI, goodness-of-fit
index; AGFI, adjusted goodness-of-fit index.

Fig. 5. Electron micrograph and phylogenetic relationship
of isolated Paenibacillus strains in this study. (a)
Scanning electron microscopy image of vegetative typed-
Paenibacillus macerans HMSSN-036 stain. (b) Scanning
electron microscopy image of spore typed-Paenibacillus
macerans HMSSN-036 stain. (c) Scanning electron
microscopy image of vegetative typed-Paenibacillus sp.
HMSSN-139 stain. (d) Scanning electron microscopy
image of spore typed-Paenibacillus sp. HMSSN-139
strain. (e) Whole-genome phylogenetic analysis of
isolated Paenibacillus strains was performed. A
phylogenetic tree was constructed by neighbor-joining
method. The isolated Paenibacillus strains are marked in
red.

Fig. 6. A putative model consequential in this study.

Table 1. Functional genes identified based on the
genomic data of Paenibacillus sp. isolated from the
thermophile-fermented compost (see the supplementary
information).