--- estimated SEM candidates (Tables S2 and S3). L-2- ---

tested after it was well mixed with the soil in the control
and test areas prior. Total nitrogen tended to increase
slightly, and the EC value related to the nitrate
concentration was higher in the test area (Table S11).
Next, a system was created to measure the amount of
N2O generated from the soil (Fig. S12c). The results of
the NGS analysis of the prepared soil indicated that it
mainly contained Gibberella sp. (66.1%) and Fusarium
sp. (28.7%) as fungi. The potato dextrose power, which
can generally be used as a medium for fungi, was added
to the soil for the test. The test results confirmed that the
conditions with added compost showed markedly
reduced N2O generation compared to that of the control
group (soil only with fungi and PDA) (Fig. S12d). Since
N2O content was approximately the same as those
under the condition with no nutritional source of fungi as
a reference test, it was suggested that the inhibitory
effect was even greater. These results are based on the
test laboratory level. In contrast, measuring nitrous
oxide at the field level and exploring the mechanism of
action of complex microorganisms is costly and time-
consuming. At any point, the phenomena identified in
this study are of social significance. On the contrary, the
use of such a laboratory system suggests that it is
possible to assess the potential for N2O generation in
soil collected from the field in the laboratory without
measuring the volume of N2O at the field level.
Furthermore, it should be noted that the soil tested
immediately after harvesting the carrot fields confirmed
an increase in PAC and a decrease in iron concentration
(Table S11). The field test results were consistent with
the compost-derived Paenibacillus strains being positive
for phosphate solubilization and siderophore reactions.
Furthermore, the growth of carrots in this field
experiment was not contradictory, even though the
isolated Paenibacillus strains from the compost were
positive for producing the plant hormone auxin.
Thus, the function of the compost was verified in the field
test and had similarities with the results of the in vitro
test as complementary data.

Discussion
Here, we succeeded in deriving structural equations
related to nitrogen metabolism in leaves, roots, and soil
as the effect of thermophile-fermented compost. In the
structural equation, it was assumed that Paenibacillus,
a candidate for nitrogen fixation, might be involved, and
we succeeded in isolating Paenibacillus strains derived
from the compost. Furthermore, based on genomic
analysis and evaluation of biological activity, the
possibility of nitrogen circulation in plants and soil by the
compost used here was confirmed.
In plants, the structural equations of amino acids and
flavonoids were inferred. The optimal compost-linked
SEM linked with apigenin 7-O-neohesperidoside,
kaempferol-Gal-Rha, and quercetin Glc as leaf
flavonoids was consistent with that phenylalanine being
the precursor of flavonoids 35,36. The model provided a
new insight on using L-2-aminoadipate as a nitrogen
compound. The 2-aminoadipate candidates commonly
detected in leaves, roots, and soil were linked to the
estimated SEM candidates (Tables S2 and S3). L-2-
aminoadipate was significantly altered in both leaves and
roots with the addition of compost, but DL-2-
aminoadipate was not always changed in the soil.
Furthermore, the difference in the L and DL types may
depend on different equipment, and the cause was
unclear. In any case, the estimated SEM candidates with
2-aminoadipate had relatively suitable fit index values.
Since 2-aminoadipate is associated with the activity of
lysine–oxoglutarate reductase 37, the relationship with
lysine was reassessed. 2-Aminoadipate was not only
reduced in leaves and roots (Fig. S13a), but the
proportion in leaves and roots increased conversely in
the roots (Fig. S13b). Lysine tended to increase in roots
(Fig. S13c), and the proportions in leaves and roots also
tended to increase in roots (Fig. S13d). Root lysine was
not adopted as a factor in the structural equation in Fig.
4b because it was not significant (p <0.05, Fig. 2c) and
did not have a high lift value in the association analysis
(Fig. S7). However, the structural equation, including
lysine, was calculated on the basis of the information on
physiological function. As in results (Table S12), the
model that included some regression model formulas
showed the optimum value, along with the models with a
metabolite annotated as metformin and arginine, rather
than the model that contained lysine and aminoadipate.
In particular, metformin and arginine also increased in the
roots (Fig. 2c). Metformin is a component of therapeutic
agents for the treatment of diabetes 38 and an anti-aging
therapy candidate 39. Previous reports of plant-derived
metformin are notable
40,41. Arginine is potentially
therapeutic for cardiovascular disorders
42. These
functional titers need to be recognized with more care
that considers their physiological efficacy. However, it
may make sense that nitrogen metabolites have been
detected after compost amendment with nitrogen-fixing
Paenibacillus.
In the structural equation of leaves and roots, carotenoids
appeared to be directly affected by compost, but the
relationship
between
other
metabolites
was
not
statistically clarified. In particular, the soil sampled
immediately after carrot cultivation showed reduced iron
(Table S11), and compost-derived Paenibacillus may be
involved in exhibiting a siderophore response to promote
iron absorption. In addition, it was reported that the
biosynthesis
of
carotenoids
was
controlled
by
cytochrome P450 43, which could have heme with iron as
an essential component 44.
In the structural equations between soil metabolites, soil
bacteria, and compost, the decreasing trend of
nicotinamide and the increasing trend of S-methyl L-
cysteine deserve attention. Nicotinamide has been
reported to be involved in plant growth 45-47, biological
defense48, and antioxidant activity49. S-methyl L-cysteine
sulfoxide, a derivative of S-methyl L-cysteine, is a
repellent against plant parasitic nematodes 50, which
reduce plant growth and productivity. S-methyl L-
cysteine sulfoxide, a precursor of soil fumigant
dimethyldisulide (DMDS) (Dangi et al., 2014), is
produced by plants (Friedrich et al., 2022) and bacteria