--- 2010 World Census of Agriculture ---

5.3. Statistics 2010 World Census of Agriculture As in previous rounds,the 2010 round of agricultural censuses will main- ly focus on measuring structural aspects of crop and livestock produc- tion at the agricultural holding level. A new element will be the collec- tion of data at the community level, such as the village.This will include data on infrastructure and other community-level services.

FAOSTAT2 and CountrySTAT FAOSTAT, the FAO statistical database, is an online multi-lingual database currently containing over three million time-series records from over 210 countries and territories covering agriculture, nutrition, fisheries, forestry, food aid, land use and population. Data collection relies on question- naires submitted by member countries. The new system (FAOSTAT2) seeks to provide better access to data, ensure that data is of consistently high quality and enhance data dissemination mechanisms. It also includes CountrySTAT, a country-appropriate version of FAOSTAT2 that allows countries to develop and implement a statistical information sys- tem relevant to their specific agricultural situations.

CountrySTAT seeks to strengthen capacity of member nations to coordi- nate,harmonize and enhance the value of their data collections.It provides countries with basic tools for verifying, validating and deriving analytical indicators for uses such as food balance sheets or supply/utilization accounts. It encourages coordination and consolidation among various data collections at national and sub-national levels. In 2005, national proj- ects started in three pilot countries and will be further implemented in 20 additional countries.

The data stored in CountrySTAT databases are organized in two major groups: CountrySTAT Core, which contains national data shared with FAOSTAT database;and the CountrySTAT Sub-national,composed of data owned by various national authorities.This arrangement of CountrySTAT Core and Sub-national provide end-users with the possibility of “navi- gating” throughout data starting from either geographic or thematic paths. CountrySTAT is also committed to creating protocol and proce- dures for exchanging data via human-readable and platform-independ- ent documents written in languages such as XML, which allow direct and open data harvesting from national web servers.

Sustainable Agriculture – From Common Principles to Common Practice 232