--- Fritz J. Häni (PhD) ---

About the editors Fritz J. Häni (PhD) Co-chair INFASA Swiss College of Agriculture (SHL), Bern University of Applied Sciences, Zollikofen, Switzerland Dr. Häni is a Professor of Plant Pathology, and Head of the Agroecology Program at the Swiss College of Agriculture. He has been working for many years on national and international projects, in particular dealing with agro-ecosystems; natural regulation; functional biodiversity; and ecologically-oriented and integrated farming systems. Prof. Häni is an editor and author of a number of books on these subjects that have been translated in many languages. In recent years his work has been focused on sustainability indicators and assessment (model RISE:

Response-Inducing Sustainability Evaluation). He is a Co-founder of the Swiss Society of Phytiatry (Plant Protection), a society of the Swiss Academy of Sciences.

László Pintér (PhD) Co-chair INFASA International Institute for Sustainable Development (IISD), Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada Dr. László Pintér has worked with IISD since 1994 and is currently the Director of Measurement and Assessment.His areas of expertise include the conceptualization, establishment and use of integrated indicator, assessment and reporting systems in the context of sustainable devel- opment strategies. He leads IISD’s collaboration with the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) on capacity building for integrated environmental assessment and IISD’s five-year collaborative project with Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada (AAFC) in the areas of social indica- tors, full-cost accounting and international cooperation. Dr. Pintér is also Co-founder of the Canadian Sustainability Indicators Network (CSIN).

Hans R. Herren (PhD) President Millennium Institute, Arlington,Virginia, USA Dr. Herren is well known for launching the very successful Africa-wide Cassava Mealybug Biological Control Program. In recognition of his dis- tinguished achievements in research in insect science, modelling and sustainable development, he has been elected to the U.S. National Sustainable Agriculture – From Common Principles to Common Practice 247