--- European Environment Agency, Convention on Biological Diversity, UN ---

compare the relative costs of water pollution versus soil erosion,or com- paring the benefits of conserving biodiversity versus sequenstering car- bon in farmed soils.

There are many difficulties in measuring the economic costs and bene- fits of agriculture on the environment; especially estimating benefits relating to ecological services where markets frequently do not exist (for example, biodiversity). A number of countries have begun to estimate the environmental costs and benefits of farming activities. The U.K., for example, is developing preliminary monetized environmental accounts for the country’s agricultural sector.

In order to better serve the needs of policy-makers and the public, greater efforts are needed to strengthen indicator networks between OECD and: other international organizations (such as FAO, Eurostat, European Environment Agency, Convention on Biological Diversity, UN Commission on Sustainable Development);scientists,developers of indi- cators,policy analysts,farmers,and the agri-food chain (such as the major multi-national food corporations that have developed sustainable indi- cators for their own management purposes); and non-OECD countries.

Efforts are also needed to strengthen indicator networks between gov- ernments and non-governmental organizations (such as BirdLife International,WWF and IUCN).

Strengthening indicator networks would potentially help avoid the duplication of efforts,bring (or link) together the best expertise in devel- oping indicators from scientific, policy and practical perspectives, and possibly lead to some harmonization of indicator definitions, calcula- tions, uses in modelling, and interpretation of results. They could also provide forums for thinking about the future development of indica- tors—into new or difficult areas,contributing to developing the moneti- zation of physical indicator values so as to allow comparisons of overall environmental trends across time and countries, finding lower-cost proxy indicators (such as farm management practices or land uses), and considering the suitability of transferring OECD-country experiences in developing indicators to non-OECD countries. Another dimension that warrants more attention is the relationship between national, regional and farm-level indicators.

That being said, to date the development of indicators has been very resource intensive, and many rely on existing public sources of informa- tion. Many governments are reluctant to devote more of their scarce resources to develop new indicators. Agri-environmental indicators are relatively young in relation to many established economic and social Sustainable Agriculture – From Common Principles to Common Practice 217