--- Page 65 ---

and trends of farms as agro-ecosystems and are related to the processes caused by various land management practices (Eswaran et al., 2000) and can be used in evaluating impacts of agricultural extension services. A desirable feature of an LQI is its ability to quantify and simplify information in such a way that its use in farming and the extension-service decision- making process is clear,while allowing variations within and between farm systems to be easily discernible and predictable.

Although Kenya was used extensively by FAO for studies on land evalua- tion (FAO, 1976 and 1984) and agro-ecosystems zoning (FAO/IIASA, 1991), LQI development is still in its early stages. Globally, some promising work has been done with respect to concept definition and framework devel- opment (Bouma,2002;Dumanski and Pieri,2000).Kosmas et al.(2000) and Kosmas et al. (1999b) used some key indicators or land parameters for defining environmentally sensitive areas (ESA) to desertification in Greece.

The integration of participatory land management approaches in land- use planning techniques and farm sustainability assessment has not been previously attempted in Kenya with present indicators. The work by Murage et al. (2000) provided a diagnostic analysis for soil quality but did not conceive an approach for the integration of GIS-based multi-variate farm sustainability diagnosis. Elsewhere, other farm sustainability indices diagnoses like the study by Mandal et al. (2001) in India have been crop- specific and site-specific, offering little room for prediction and interpola- tion for wider agricultural sustainability and extension impact assessment.

This paper presents the use of farm level indicators to assess sustainable agriculture and extension impact using the platform of farm sustainability assessment decision support system, an interactive spatial tool for farm classification (Ochola and Kerkides,2004).

Agricultural sustainability assessment Farm sustainability and need for agro-ecosystems sustainability assessment The functions of land are diverse (FAO,1995) and include:(1) production; (2) environmental biodiversity maintenance; (3) climate regulation; (4) regulation of the storage and flow of surface and ground water resources; (5) storehouse of raw materials and minerals for human use; (6) waste and pollution control; (7) provision of physical living space; (8) archive or heritage; and (9) provision of connective space. The qualities and limitations of any land unit are based on these functions.The assess- ment of the quality of any land unit must, therefore, use methods that Sustainable Agriculture – From Common Principles to Common Practice 52