--- Sustainability Solution Space (SSP) method. As a crucial component of ---

ranges,we suggest again a transdisciplinary approach by using available values as defined by governmental policies, and we use expert inter- views and workshops to obtain consensus values regarding topics where no guidelines exist (Cormick, 1996; Susskind et al., 1999). 4. Discussion and conclusions To achieve sustainable development in agriculture, sustainability assess- ment is required to guide strategy-building and subsequent actions.

Systemic assessment approaches prove to outmatch approaches that rely on lists of isolated indicators or that remain in the monitoring stage without assessing the current stage and future options based on the available normative knowledge (including preferences and values).

Exemplarily,this paper presented as a systemic assessment approach the Sustainability Solution Space (SSP) method. As a crucial component of reliable and valid sustainability assessments, the adequate involvement of stakeholders and decision-makers has been vividly discussed in the scientific community over the last two decades.Thus,the paper explores how extensively transdisciplinary approaches can be adopted for the SSP method in the field of sustainability assessment in agricultural sci- ence.We showed that this method allows for: ● including culture-specific system aspects; ● setting culture-specific sustainability values; ● analyzing the interaction among indicators within regionally specific areas; and ● developing strategies for improving sustainability.

Considering the partly exaggerated enthusiasm for participation and involvement, we would like to draw attention to transaction costs for col- laboration and coordination in transdisciplinary research.From our experi- ence it seemed to be most valuable to set up a facilitator moderating and mediating the process of problem-oriented transdisciplinary collaboration (van de Kerkhof and Wierczorek, 2005). The role of the facilitator is to ensure an effective and efficient process aimed to keep the transaction costs of collaboration and cooperation low.Otherwise,the willingness-to- cooperate will shrink or even come to a halt. Regarding transaction costs, it is important to note that the proposed SSP approach promotes and supports cooperation and coordination based on a careful evaluation, whether problems identified should be tackled in transdisciplinary, less- participatory (e.g.,consultative) or non-participatory settings.

Sustainable Agriculture – From Common Principles to Common Practice 43