--- 5 FADN or Farm Accounting Data Network. ---

● the calculation of indicators with data from national databanks (like FADN5) and not from individual farmer surveys. This work would create the possibility, in particular, of evaluating the new data required and the ad hoc processing to be applied so that it could measure, in time, the contribution of farms to the new expectations of civil society (multi-functionality, environmental services).

As well as this, the IDEA method can also not only be a most interesting assessment tool to guide farmers who are conducting a farm audit prior to committing to agri-environmental measures (called Sustainable Management Contract in France) but also a tool for monitoring and assessing measures in rural development regulations. In the latter case, complementary research work would seem necessary to measure how the indicators in the method fit in with the main measures in rural devel- opment regulations.

Finally,the new rules of cross compliance on support for agriculture (CAP, 2003) will necessarily raise questions on how to go about increasing sup- port for farms in line with the new expectations of consumers and citi- zens concerning the quality of products and the environment.As for the recent agreements at the World Trade Organization (2005), there are questions about the contents of the “green box”and types of agriculture which will still be supported after 2014 (deadline for next agreement regarding the future CAP).This is certain to become one of the stakes in international negotiations on agriculture. The European Union will be called upon to prove the link between the level of public aid, the multi- functional character of farms and sustainable agriculture. If the large- scale application of a reorientation of subsidies is to be possible, first the practical problems must be resolved relating to the definition of the cri- teria corresponding to these objectives, criteria which must be legible, simple and effective to use in the field.

The latest prospective research using the IDEA method aimed at the assessment of the level of sustainability for French farming systems by major production systems and by regions. It was based on the transpo- sition or adaptation of the sustainability indicators in the IDEA method in order to analyze the sustainability of the principal French type of farm- ing, no longer the sustainability of individual farms only.This study com- bines the set of indicators of the IDEA method with information from two additional databases (the FADN6 and the farming census) (Girardin 5 FADN or Farm Accounting Data Network. 6 Farm Accounting Data Network.

Sustainable Agriculture – From Common Principles to Common Practice 106