--- and Beyeler, 2001; Zhen and Routay, 2003): ---

● goal orientation – the indicators have to depict the goals of the stakeholders as defined in the pre-phase of the SSP process (prerequisites phase). ● data availability – the indicators have to be easily measurable;and ● system correspondence – the indicators have to represent the system adequately.

Regarding the latter, the indicators furthermore should allow for (Dale and Beyeler, 2001; Zhen and Routay, 2003): ● analyzing stress within the system; ● depicting possible damages in advance; and ● integrating different aspects of an issue (e.g., combine several ecological aspects of agriculture).

The transdisciplinary process at this stage comprises brainstorming workshops for identifying preliminary sets of indicators from different perspectives, prioritization of indicators for selected regions by different stakeholder groups,and validation of the selected indicators for the spe- cific area. However, a transdisciplinary process also requires a scientific complement (Gibbons et al., 1994). This means that the indicators defined during the brainstorming process have to be carefully revised by the researchers following principles based on system-theoretical approaches and concepts of sustainable development (Bossel, 1999; Robot, 2002;Wiek and Binder, 2005).

Regarding agriculture,even though authors mostly agree on which indi- cators might be viable for characterizing the ecological and economic aspects of an agricultural system,2 little agreement exists on how to determine and define social indicators.

We consider that social indicators can be divided into culture depend- ent and culture independent indicators. The first ones are comparable among countries and continents, the second have to be adapted for specific political and cultural backgrounds (Lefroy et al., 2000).

Culture independent indicators We suggest that these indicators be comparable among countries.

Examples of such indicators are (Würtenberger et al., 2006): 2 Please note: authors do agree on the indicators but not on which values are sustain- able (see also Zhen and Routay, 2003).

Sustainable Agriculture – From Common Principles to Common Practice 41