--- FAO’s Save and Grow project in Sri Lanka ---

11 Sri Lanka – working together to scale up climate-smart crop systems Introduction Climate change particularly affects resource-poor smallholder farmers. Their agricultural operations tend to be barely profitable and are often environmentally unsustainable. In Sri Lanka, the combination of heavy rains, soil tillage and poor nutrient cycling results in soil erosion and soil fertility loss in the uplands. This reduces the productivity of fields in those areas and causes siltation of water reservoirs, with negative consequences for irrigation systems and water productivity in the lowlands.

FAO’s Save and Grow project in Sri Lanka supports the transition to more productive and resilient smallholder farm systems and aims to reduce GHG emissions in rice production systems.3 This is done through the adoption of climate- smart crop production practices, integrated landscape planning and management, and improved access to inputs, technical advice, credit and other financial services. The project contributes to the building of the evidence base for CSA assessments of the impact of climate change on crop yields in Sri Lanka, as well as of climate change adaptation options to strengthen Sri Lanka’s agriculture sector in the face of climate change.

The project, which runs from 2019 to 2021, is implemented by FAO and supported by Germany’s Federal Ministry of Food and Agriculture. Among the Sri Lankan partners that collaborate with the project are the Hector Kobbekaduwa Agrarian Research and Training Institute, the Department of Agriculture, the Rice Research and Development Institute, the Field Crop Research and Development Institute, the Farm Mechanization Research Centre, the Farm Mechanization Training Centre, the Department of Agrarian Development, provincial and interprovincial agriculture departments, and the Department of Meteorology.

Rationale Climate change challenges agriculture in many ways; it directly and indirectly affects productivity, employment, food security and the wider economy. In Sri Lanka, high-intensity rainfall causes erosion in the uplands and siltation of water tanks in the lowlands, causing these tanks to operate at suboptimal capacities. This increases the vulnerability of farmers in both the uplands and the lowlands. Smallholder farmers lack access to inputs, technical advice, credit and other financial services. As a result, they are unable to access technologies that improve the resilience of crop systems to specific climate stressors and reduce yield gaps. 3 For more information on FAO’s Save and Grow project in Sri Lanka, see www.fao.org/in-action/save-grow-climate-smart/in-action/lka. ©Asanga Nayanajith Ranasinghe