--- their incomes. With USD 7.8 million from the GEF Special Climate Change Fund and USD 5 million from IFAD’s ---

58
(down 40 to 47 percent) from 2012 until 2040. These changes in crop productivity are mainly attributed to the
projected temperature increase, which affects grain filling periods and has detrimental effects on grain development
stages, thereby reducing grain yield and quality (Egyptian Environmental Affairs Agency, 2016).
In rural areas, financial services not only fail to reach the poor, but the provision of services is usually also hampered
by the lack of appropriate loan products. Traditional loan products were not designed to reflect the particular
characteristics of agricultural lending and are often unable to resolve constraints along agricultural value chains.
Prior to SAIL, there were no special loan products for settlers on newly reclaimed lands or for young entrepreneurs.
SAIL is scaling up the successful experience of the West Noubaria Rural Development Project, which gave farmers
access to credit for the introduction of efficient irrigation systems. Most of the credit provided under SAIL is used
to increase the efficiency of water use and make the distribution of water more equitable, thus enhancing farmers’
adaptive capacity to climate change-induced water scarcity. SAIL credit also supports investments by groups of
farmers in solar-powered water pumps, solar panels for lighting and biogas units.
Description
The SAIL project aims to enable smallholder farmers to improve profitability, diversify their livelihoods and increase
their incomes. With USD 7.8 million from the GEF Special Climate Change Fund and USD 5 million from IFAD’s
Adaptation for Smallholder Agriculture Programme, the project aims at contributing to climate change adaptation
and mitigation as well as poverty reduction and food security objectives in the face of the predicted negative impacts
of climate change on crop and livestock production in Egypt. The project aims inter alia at increasing the climate
resilience of crop and livestock value chains in reclaimed lands by promoting the adoption of efficient irrigation
technologies that build adaptive capacities towards climate-induced water scarcity.
SAIL consists of three main components:

community and livelihood development;

agricultural development and diversification; and

rural financial services.
The project is a good illustration of how the five action points of CSA are interrelated. Its main interventions were
formulated based on information from studies undertaken prior to execution (CSA action point 1). For example, a
detailed technical study was completed on the lining of third-level canals or mesqas, an adaptation action to climate
change. This study identified the most sustainable materials to be used as lining in view of the area’s conditions.
SAIL is carried out in close collaboration with the Egyptian Government (CSA action point 2) and includes capacity
building activities (CSA action point 3). In March 2019, for example, representatives of the SAIL project presented, on
behalf of Egypt, the project’s recommendations for climate change adaptation in the agriculture sector in the region
at the ministerial meeting of the League of Arab States. Furthermore, the SAIL project has held 17 training sessions
for representatives from government and civil society institutions on climate change downscaling methodologies to
analyse climate change impacts and adaptation needs in agriculture and irrigation.
The project’s credit component (CSA action point 4) creates two windows for loans for investments: SME lending
and microloan facilities. The project aims to enhance access to capital for smallholder farmers. To this end, it
provides credit funds that allow the government to disburse loans, as well as institutional support for the provision of
innovative financial services. The credit line is currently channeled through the Egyptian Agricultural Development
Programme and the Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Development Agency.
In addition, the project promotes the adoption of energy-efficient technologies (CSA action point 5).