--- Incorporating Brassicas into Forage Systems Leads to Longer Grazing ---

NORTHEAST SARE 10 SARE 2023/2024 REPORT FROM THE FIELD www.sare.org Incorporating Brassicas into Forage Systems Leads to Longer Grazing Seasons and Lower Methane Emissions Grazing livestock on brassicas such as turnips can significantly reduce methane emissions.

Photo by Keith Murray This project will contribute to the future sustainability of grazing dairy farms via providing alternative forage options to extend the grazing season.

Kathy Soder, USDA Agricultural Research Service THE CHALLENGE The growing demand for grass-fed meat and milk products has led to increased costs for farmers, particularly when it comes to feed. These increases have driven pasture-based dairy and livestock farmers to seek ways to lower costs and extend the grazing season for their animals, which isn’t always easy in the variable weather of the Northeast. Concerns about methane production from livestock diets are also on the rise, making it necessary to evaluate season-extending forages for their potential impacts on greenhouse gas emissions.

A team led by USDA Agricultural Research Service Animal Scientist Kathy Soder hypothesized that incorporating brassicas into grazing systems across the Northeast would produce equal or superior animal performance while generating less methane per cow than systems with annual ryegrass. If so, brassicas such as canola, turnips and forage rape may close gaps in seasonal forage availability, reduce feed costs and potentially reduce methane emis- sions from grazing livestock.

THE ACTIONS TAKEN After securing a SARE Research and Education grant, the multi-state project team surveyed grazing farmers across the Northeast to determine their preexisting knowledge about, and research needs for, using brassicas in grazing systems. Results showed that farmers are very interested in exploring alternative forages but are hesitant to try them due to animal health concerns and a lack of knowledge on how to properly establish the forages. The team also ran an in-vitro study evaluating the effects of turnip, canola and forage rape on ruminal fermentation and methane outputs. And a two-year grazing experi- ment at the University of New Hampshire demonstrated that partially replacing bale- age with grazing canola in late fall yielded similar milk production and composition in Jersey cows, and reduced feed use by 40%, a significant cost savings. Finally, the team hosted field days, webinars and online training events, and produced fact sheets and journal articles in order to spread their results to as many farmers as possible.

THE IMPACTS This project revealed several convincing benefits when brassicas are added to graz- ing systems. Specific impacts include: • Methane reduction: The in-vitro study showed that the brassicas reduced methane output by nearly 50% when compared to standard annual ryegrass, without affecting nutrient digestibility. • Increased productivity: A forage plot experiment showed that the three brassicas produced nearly double the amount of fall forage compared to annual ryegrass and generated two to three times the protein and energy.

These yields can lead to more grazing days and greater animal productivity when other forages are dormant. • Fast adoption: Farmers benefited from the outreach efforts. Several quickly began using brassicas on their farms, and more than 40 farmers were considering incorporating brassicas into their grazing systems.

Learn more: See the related SARE project LNE16-352.