--- Miguel A. Altieri ---

Agroecology: principles and strategies for designing sustainable farming systems.

Miguel A. Altieri University of California, Berkeley The concept of sustainable agriculture is a relatively recent response to the decline in the quality of the natural resource base associated with modern agriculture (McIsaac and Edwards 1994). Today, the question of agricultural production has evolved from a purely technical one to a more complex one characterized by social, cultural, political and economic dimensions. The concept of sustainability although controversial and diffuse due to existing conflicting definitions and interpretations of its meaning, is useful because it captures a set of concerns about agriculture which is conceived as the result of the co- evolution of socioeconomic and natural systems (Reijntjes et al. 1992). A wider understanding of the agricultural context requires the study between agriculture, the global environment and social systems given that agricultural development results from the complex interaction of a multitude of factors. It is through this deeper understanding of the ecology of agricultural systems that doors will open to new management options more in tune with the objectives of a truly sustainable agriculture.

The sustainability concept has prompted much discussion and has promoted the need to propose major adjustments in conventional agriculture to make it more environmentally, socially and economically viable and compatible. Several possible solutions to the environmental problems created by capital and technology intensive farming systems have been proposed and research is currently in progress to evaluate alternative systems (Gliessman 1998). the main focus lies on the reduction or elimination of agrochemical inputs through changes in management to assure adequate plant nutrition and plant protection through organic nutrient sources and integrated pest management, respectively.

Although hundreds of more environmentally prone research projects and technological development attempts have taken place, and many lessons have been learned, the thrust is still highly technological, emphasizing the suppression of limiting factors or the symptoms that mask an ill producing agroecosystem. The prevalent philosophy is that pests, nutrient deficiencies or other factors are the cause of low productivity, as opposed to the view that pests or nutrients only become limiting if conditions in the agroecosystem are not in equilibrium (Carrol et al. 1990). For this reason, there still prevails a narrow view that specific causes affect productivity, and overcoming the limiting factor via new technologies, continues to be the main goal. This view has diverted agriculturists from realizing that limiting factors only represent symptoms of a more systemic disease inherent to unbalances within the agroecosystem and from an appreciation of the context and complexity of agroecological processes thus underestimating the root causes of agricultural limitations (Altieri et al. 1993).