--- Page 10 ---

Accumulibacter, Candidatus Phosphoribacter (previously Tetrasphaera), and Dechloromonas.79 EBPR
depends on cycling between anaerobic and aerobic conditions to enrich PAOs. Under anaerobic conditions,
PAOs consume carbon substrates such as volatile fatty acids, glucose or amino acids and store them as
polyhydroxyalkanoates (PHA), glycogen or free amino acids.80–83 Polyphosphate is a source of energy used
to synthesize these carbon storage molecules, and its catabolism results in release of inorganic
orthophosphate (Pi) from the cells. Under aerobic conditions, stored carbon is consumed to produce energy
for cell growth and reproduction. In the process, polyphosphate stores are replenished, resulting in a net
removal of phosphorus from the wastewater. After settling, collecting, and treating the microbial biomass
(called biosolids in the wastewater industry) that is rich in phosphorus, it is often applied to agricultural
lands. The forms of phosphorus, such as poly-P, are more bioavailable to the soil and plants than is
chemically precipitated phosphorus. The intracellular poly-P is slowly degraded and released to the soil and
plants (Fig. 6b). Digesting the settled biomass in anaerobic digesters releases the poly-P as orthophosphate,
which can then be converted into field-ready fertilizers such as struvite at WRRFs. To the best of our
knowledge, outside of the wastewater treatment field, there are no other applications of PAOs to remove
phosphorus from aqueous matrices.

PAOs may play a role in P transformations in natural environments, including agricultural environments
and those adjacent to agricultural settings.41 Biologically-derived poly-P is ubiquitous in nature, though the
contribution of specific PAOs in P cycling in natural environments is not well understood.41,84 However,
there is evidence of PAO-mediated phosphorus cycling in these environments. Saia et al. conducted ex-situ
experiments on native stream biofilms, demonstrating characteristic phosphorus uptake and release
capabilities by these microbial communities.85 Coupled with evidence of intracellularly-stored poly-P, this
study demonstrated that poly-P accumulators in freshwater environments may contribute to phosphorus
cycling, particularly during diel oxygenic conditions. Furthermore, Taylor et al. demonstrated that stream
biofilms in nutrient-depleted sites stored more intracellular poly-P than those in nutrient-rich sites.86 This
study suggested that microbial communities in environments with higher legacy phosphorus store less poly-
P. PAOs identified in EBPR have also been identified in sediments. Watson et al. detected Ca.
Accumulibacter in Columbia River estuary sediments that exhibited an increase in poly-P during the day.87
Understanding the roles of PAOs for phosphorus transformations in natural environments and specifically
how PAOs contribute to phosphorus cycling in agricultural soils is an opportunity for future research. By
advancing understanding of both biological and physical-chemical phosphorus transformation processes,
biologists and engineers can work together to better harness these powerful systems to improve phosphorus
management by transforming phosphorus into forms that are more conducive to removal (to enhance
protection of environmental waters from eutrophication), recovery (to encourage a circular phosphorus
economy), and reuse (to support global food production).

Integrating stakeholder perceptions and needs into research and innovation for phosphorus
sustainability
Developing sustainable solutions for phosphorus management requires new technological innovations and
improved management practices, as well as a deeper understanding and integration of stakeholder needs
and priorities. By integrating stakeholder needs and priorities within research and innovation cycles, the
proportion of technologies, management practices and innovations (e.g. new crop varieties, smart fertilizers,
removal/recovery systems) that will ultimately be adopted by end-users increases substantially. In addition,
better understanding and incorporating stakeholder needs and priorities within early phases of research and