--- SUPPORTING THE SDGs ---

SUSTAINABLE AGRICULTURE
PRINCIPLES & PRACTICES
3

Climate
PRINCIPLE
An agricultural sector that minimises greenhouse gases and
air pollution, acts as a significant greenhouse gas sink, enables
adaptations to a changing climate and supports the resiliency
of farmers and farming communities.
PRACTICES
Success requires a common approach, built on strong science, speed and scale
for delivery and practical solutions. This needs to be widely adopted to provide a
foundation for economic, social and environmental viability of the farming sector.
The Climate principle is dependent on Water, Land and Soil, and Nature principles,
as well as the Resource and Markets principle. Practices which support the best
outcome for climate include:
• Implement the use of efficient farming practices; inputs and outputs management,
soil health improvement, livestock solutions, and deforestation prevention,
among others.
• Implement farming systems that increase on-farm biomass, both above and below
ground, and create a significant greenhouse gas sink.
• Reduce the use of non-renewable sources of energy and increase the use of
renewable sources of energy, and optimise the use of energy-intensive inputs,
e.g. inorganic fertilisers.
• Manage all sources of emissions which affect air, noise and odour, such as manure
storage, burning, agrochemical applications, dust, exhaust, machinery maintenance
etc. to ensure minimal to no emissions.
• Drive energy efficiency to avoid wasting energy and increasing the use of renewable
energy and fuels on-farm.
• Use innovative techniques to identify new carbon sink practices.
CONTEXT
Agriculture and its associated land use
changes account for 25% of all human
influenced global greenhouse gas
emissions1. Agriculture not only drives
climate change but is also directly
affected by changes in water availability,
increased frequency and intensity of
weather events, and depletion of soil
carbon needed for crop production.
Climate change impacts at farm and
landscape levels increase global food
insecurity and threaten farmer livelihoods,
with far reaching impacts on human
health and nutrition, human rights,
and biodiversity.
SUPPORTING THE SDGs
1 IPCC, 2019: Climate Change and Land: an IPCC special
report on climate change, desertification, land degradation,
sustainable land management, food security, and greenhouse
gas fluxes in terrestrial ecosystems. (also available at https://
www.ipcc.ch/site/assets/uploads/sites/4/2020/08/200730-
IPCCJ7230-SRCCL-Complete-BOOK-HRES.pdf)