--- including Nature, Land and Soil, Resources and Markets, and Working ---

SUSTAINABLE AGRICULTURE
PRINCIPLES & PRACTICES
6

Water
PRINCIPLE
An agricultural sector that ensures water resources are
optimally managed; water balance is maintained for the
catchment, water runoff and pollution is minimised, water
is managed for economic benefit, and equitable access to
water is assured for all users (human and wildlife).
CONTEXT
Water is vital to productive agriculture.
Irrigation from ground and surface waters
(specifically rivers, lakes, and aquifers)
accounts for 70% of water usage by
human activity; however unsustainable
use of aquatic resources, as well as the
introduction of agri-chemicals to waterways,
contributes to increasing global water
shortages and diminished quality of
water resources1. Climate change causes
additional strain to agricultural systems
by increasing the frequency and intensity
of extreme weather events, such as
prolonged rainfall and drought.
PRACTICES
Water management is interlinked with and can support positive outcomes for
several principles, including Nature, Land and Soil, Resources and Markets, and Working
and Living Conditions. Practices which support water stewardship include:
• Properly manage and optimise water use.
• Manage water use in line with the recharge capacity of the watershed/catchment.
• Use cropping systems which are sympathetic to the regional water availability.
• Only use irrigation when it can enhance the yield and quality of crops produced and
provide economic benefit.
• Install the best available water delivery system.
• Properly manage the use of inputs and release of wastewater in surrounding
water sources.
• Protect surface and ground water from direct and indirect pollution.
• Ensure access to clean drinking water and availability of water for sanitation and
hygiene for farmers, workers and their families if living on farm.
• Ensure appropriate storage and application of inputs including manure, to avoid
pollution and runoff.
• Ensure appropriate management techniques to avoid soil loss into waterbodies.
SUPPORTING THE SDGs
1 FAO. 2011. The state of the world’s land and water resources
for food and agriculture (SOLAW) – Managing systems at risk.
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations.
Rome and Earthscan, London. (also available at http://www.
fao.org/3/i1688e/i1688e.pdf)