--- Health and Safety is strongly linked with the Working and Living Conditions Principle. ---

SUSTAINABLE AGRICULTURE PRINCIPLES & PRACTICES 11 Health and Safety PRACTICES Health and Safety is strongly linked with the Working and Living Conditions Principle.

Practices which support health and safety include: • Provide effective instructions and take measures to protect the health and safety of farmers, farm workers and nearby communities, particularly those who handle or are exposed to agrochemicals. • Ensure all those working with livestock are well-trained and capable of managing the risks. • Ensure facilities and equipment are adequate for worker safety, most notably those related to livestock and agri-chemical management. • Provide personal protective equipment appropriate to the tasks and conditions. • Ensure tasks are allocated and undertaken as appropriate for capabilities and training. • Construct storage facilities to minimise risks to the environment and human health. • Actions should be promoted which help prevent accidents and injuries of farmers and farm workers during their duties. • Provide first aid/medical training to sufficient personnel to ensure access to first aid is always available to those working on farm. • Promote activities for the prevention of diseases, such as vaccination programmes. • Ensure access to medical treatment is available.

PRINCIPLE An agricultural sector that supports the health and safety of farmers, farm workers and their families, and nearby communities.

CONTEXT Agriculture is one of the top three most dangerous sectors in the world, accounting for over half of all workplace accidents globally every year. Nearly 50% of the global workforce is engaged in agricultural work, and is exposed to many risks including heavy machinery, livestock management, physically demanding and repetitive labour conditions in variable weather and challenging terrain, and exposure to dust and toxins (including fertilisers, pesticides, and fuels). Risks for farmers and farm workers living in rural and/or developing areas are exacerbated by limited access to healthcare and education, lack of support systems for workplace health and safety, and less stringent regulations1.

SUPPORTING THE SDGs 1 ILO 2003. Decent work in agriculture. Labour Education 2003/2-3 No. 131-132. (also available at https://www.ilo. org/wcmsp5/groups/public/---ed_dialogue/---actrav/ documents/publication/wcms_111457.pdf)