--- Food, Farming and Countryside Commission (2022), ---

Sustainable agriculture and food systems Comparing contrasting and contested versions 16  Chatham House Given the strength of the assumption that demand needs to be met through productivity growth, it also follows that the most sustainable system is one which maximizes productivity in places with comparative advantage and avoids productivity in places with comparative disadvantage. Trade liberalization is therefore a key part of enabling efficient land use on a global basis.

Critique: Demand is influenced by price and by the market itself (e.g. through marketing – see critique of Assumption 1), and productivity growth can, through the ‘Jevons paradox’, increase demand, by reducing prices and increasing availability, and decrease the efficiency of the whole system by increasing its environmental and human costs. If productivity growth leads to greater per person availability beyond human metabolic limits, it will result in either ill health and/or food waste. Hence, while proponents of the market-led framing of Version 1 argue for productivity growth to ‘feed the world’ through meeting demand growth, such growth may instead contribute to more waste and excess food consumption for the majority of the global population. The notion that people should be entitled to eat food that has negative attributes (in terms of their health and/or environment) can be countered by research that suggests many people buy such foods not because of inherent preference, but because of affordability and accessibility. Many examples of social research suggest that if lower-impact foods were more affordable, people would prefer to consume them32 (see critique to Version 1, Assumption 3, below).

Furthermore, demand globally is met and enabled by increasingly significant international trade in commodities. While trade can optimize land use through maximizing comparative advantage, aspects of the comparative advantage can include weak environmental and social governance. Given the notion that demand should be met, privileging market needs over environmental and social protection can lead to a global ‘race to the bottom’, via the vicious circles of the Jevons paradox:33 more demand creates more economic value, which increases profits and market share, and as the volume produced increases, prices fall which in turn increases demand.

Assumption 3: Dietary change to reduce demand is ‘difficult’ and not the preserve of policy Framing: A core tenet of neoliberal thinking is that markets allow individuals to meet their preferences, which in turn drive the behaviour of markets.34 Various studies have concluded that ‘nudges’ to change consumption behaviour may work, but only to a limited extent.35 This reinforces the view that existing consumption patterns are ‘revealed preferences’ (showing what consumers really want to consume) and that demand for food is relatively inelastic (i.e. consumption changes relatively little in response to marginal price changes). Given these assumptions, future demand will depend on the increased consumer purchasing 32 Food, Farming and Countryside Commission (2022), Hungry for health: What citizens want from food, London: FFCC, https://ffcc.co.uk/assets/downloads/FFCC-HungryForHealth-What-citizens-want-from-food.pdf. 33 Benton and Bailey (2019), ‘The paradox of productivity’. 34 Isenhour, C. (2010), ‘On conflicted Swedish consumers, the effort to stop shopping and neoliberal environmental governance’, Journal of Consumer Behaviour, 9(6), pp. 454–69, https://doi.org/10.1002/cb.336. 35 Nisa, C. F., Bélanger, J. J., Schumpe, B. M. and Faller, D. G. (2019), ‘Meta-analysis of randomised controlled trials testing behavioural interventions to promote household action on climate change’, Nature Communications, 10(4545), https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-019-12457-2.