--- Which? (2018), ‘Brexit Consumer Research: Topic of focus: food’. ---

Sustainable agriculture and food systems Comparing contrasting and contested versions 19  Chatham House or in ways that are detrimental to health – is not promoted through policy and the market.50 This body of work suggests that there is scope for consumers to modify purchasing based on wider concerns,51 but that they are currently constrained in doing so by a lack of transparency, habit, and/or the wider food environment affecting choice and convenience of purchasing. Research indicates that consumers are likely to support government policy interventions that pursue a fairer52 or more sustainable53 food system if such changes are transparent and if the relevant debates are led by government. Given that price, and Pigouvian taxes,54 are used to shape a wide range of consumer purchasing decisions (e.g. on alcohol, sugar-sweetened beverages, tobacco and fuel), the potential of shaping food consumption through price change is a subject of current debate.55 Furthermore, there are many potential levers for influencing food purchasing behaviours from a government perspective, creating structural change in markets. Table 5.6 of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC)’s special report on ‘Climate Change and Land’ (2019)56 lists about 20 families of policy: from agricultural subsidies and research (to alter the availability of foodstuffs) through changing the food environment (e.g. ‘nudges’ over placement of goods in store), education and awareness, public procurement, direct transfers of money or food stamps, and planning law (e.g. the placement of fast food outlets). (See also Version 2, Assumption 5.) The third critique is that social attitudes have a complex set of determinants, and are themselves subject to non-linear change. Indeed, given certain circumstances, attitudinal and behavioural change can be rapid and significant (as shown during the COVID-19 pandemic). Hence, the perception that, in the recent past, behaviour change has been ‘difficult’ does not mean that will always be the case. It is possible to imagine plausible combinations of circumstances where social norms change rapidly, opening up the space for rapid change in consumption behaviour. For example, two fires in London’s transport network, the first at Oxford Circus station in 1984 and the second, which claimed 31 lives, at King’s Cross in 1987, created the political space to start implementing smoking bans in public – initially within 50 Which? (2018), ‘Brexit Consumer Research: Topic of focus: food’. 51 Vermeulen, S. J., Park, T., Khoury, C. K. and Béné, C. (2020), ‘Changing diets and the transformation of the global food system’, Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, 1478(1), p. 3, https://doi.org/10.1111/nyas.14446. 52 Food, Farming and Countryside Commission (2021), ‘Shifting the Food System’, 12 July 2021, https://ffcc.co.uk/ library/shifting-the-food-system. 53 Wellesley, L. and Froggatt, A. (2015), Changing Climate, Changing Diets: Pathways to Lower Meat Consumption, Report, London: Royal Institute of International Affairs, https://www.chathamhouse.org/2015/11/changing- climate-changing-diets-pathways-lower-meat-consumption. 54 An additional cost added to the market price, to cover the cost of negative externalities such as health or environmental impacts. 55 National Food Strategy (2021), The Plan, https://www.nationalfoodstrategy.org; Funke, F. et al. (2022), ‘Is Meat Too Cheap? Towards Optimal Meat Taxation’, INET Oxford Working Paper No. 2022-01, https://www.inet.ox.ac.uk/publications/no-2022-01-is-meat-too-cheap-towards-optimal-meat-taxation. 56 Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (2019), ‘Climate Change and Land’.

Social attitudes have a complex set of determinants, and are themselves subject to non-linear change.

Indeed, given certain circumstances, attitudinal and behavioural change can be rapid and significant.