--- Anderson, M. D. and Rivera Ferre, M. G. (2020), ‘Unsustainable by design: Extractive narratives of ending ---

Sustainable agriculture and food systems Comparing contrasting and contested versions 38  Chatham House For example, one recent paper has highlighted the need to recognize and analyse the narrative explanations for the functioning of a food system that is based on intensive agriculture:

The narrative behind this extractive food system [‘industrial agriculture’] has not been questioned sufficiently, and alternative narratives of regenerative food systems (e.g., agroecology, food sovereignty) have been framed as incapable of sufficient productivity to sustain world populations or even “anti-science”. Yield increases are indeed needed in some regions, especially with growing impacts of the climate emergency; but given the urgency of combatting climate change and socioeconomic impacts of Covid-19, regenerative food production systems that simultaneously sequester more carbon and bring social benefits to poor food producers and their communities are essential and their narrative must be strengthened.150 Thus, this paper has contrasted two different models for how agriculture relates to sustainability at the system level. These are somewhat exaggerated in nature, and on balance the future is more likely to see a combination of both Version 1 and Version 2, or a system which occupies the middle ground between the two, rather than an exact interpretation of either. The potential for a mix (with, for example, a certain proportion of farms or regions – or, indeed, of each version – tending more towards one or other end of the spectrum) will probably not be decided with reference to a scientific evidence base. Rather, it will depend on the primacy of the role given to the market and its drivers, and, as such, will be the outcome of a political and ideological process, enabled or disabled by incumbent power relationships and the political economy.

For Version 2 to have a significant role in the future, the market needs to change significantly – including through regulation – to incentivize or otherwise deliver less demand for food overall, but at the same time delivering greater demand for food with the attributes of social and public health goods (i.e. healthier diets and more sustainable production). While this is possible, it runs counter to prevailing ideology: in that it will be perceived to be limiting personal freedom, constraining choice, and creating a ‘nanny state’. This transition is thus politically difficult, but not impossible over a timescale of decades (as shown by the range of enabling changes being made to support the energy transition). It is also made more complex in a globally embedded world, as promoting the consumption of ‘better diets’ has implications for trading relationships – i.e. the issues of standards vs protectionism – overseen by the WTO legal framework of non-discrimination.

Without significant structural change, the inherently market-expanding nature of capitalism is likely to continue to drive up demand through finding new ways to increase the consumption of agricultural products. If this happens, land sparing itself is threatened, as incentives will continue to drive economic spillover effects that would incentivize further deforestation (see the second critique to Version 1, Assumption 1). ‘Sustainability’ will then be restricted to 150 Anderson, M. D. and Rivera Ferre, M. G. (2020), ‘Unsustainable by design: Extractive narratives of ending hunger and regenerative alternatives’, Current Opinion in Environmental Sustainability, https://repository. middlebury.edu/islandora/object/oas%3A74.