--- The Oxford Dictionary of Philosophy ---

Sustainable agriculture and food systems
Comparing contrasting and contested versions
6  Chatham House
that they more than compensate, in terms of economic value, for the relatively
lower yields at the level of individual farms. Whether this farming system is more
sustainable is illustrated by considering the following two hypothetical cases:

— (1) Demand for food stays the same, i.e. consumers continue to eat the
same types and amounts of food: in which case, if the ‘sustainable agriculture’
system were to be adopted globally, it would imply that the area of agricultural
land would have to be expanded by at least 42 per cent (i.e. 1 divided by 0.7)
to make up for the reduction in yield. Land clearance for this purpose would
release greenhouse gas emissions, cause biodiversity losses, and degrade water
quality and availability around the world. This would suggest that, despite
being more sustainable locally, the proposed form of agriculture might lead
to a less sustainable system as a whole.

— Alternatively, in hypothetical condition (2), demand for food changes: people
are incentivized not to waste food, to adopt a healthy diet rich in plant-based
foods, and to avoid excess consumption. With a fall in demand of 30 per cent,
all farms could adopt the new, hypothetical, farming system, while delivering
the raft of environmental benefits and without needing to expand the land
‘footprint’ of agriculture. So, the same farming system could be seen to be
unsustainable in case (1) but sustainable in case (2).
As this scenario illustrates, the criteria for what makes agriculture sustainable or not
are often confusing and contested. This confusion often arises due to a lack of clarity
about whether sustainability is being discussed in the literature as a property of the
agricultural system, or the farm, or the context, or the aggregate or relative impact
(in terms of the food system’s environmental footprint, or the footprint per kg of
agricultural product). The aim of this paper is to unpack some of the framing issues
and examine the underlying assumptions being made in different discussions,
thus bringing some clarity as to how particular arguments are being made – from
different viewpoints – which underpin perspectives on how agriculture may
become more sustainable.
The goal of the paper is to provide transparency as to why there are different –
logically consistent and plausible, but nonetheless deeply contested – models
for sustainable agriculture and food systems. This systemic appraisal is built
on an examination of the robustness of the underlying assumptions, and is
relevant to a wide range of actors within global food systems, including political
decision-makers, investors and corporate stakeholders, as well as civil society
actors. These assumptions may not be apparent: instead, they may be implicit,
or unexamined, but often they are based rather less on strong evidence and
more on what proponents may think is desirable, including from an ideological8
perspective. On one level, this paper is about definitions, but it is, to a greater extent,
about the enabling assumptions that are made to underpin and legitimize different
directions of travel in order to achieve the ‘sustainability transition’.
8 Where an ideology is a ‘system of beliefs, ways of thought, and categories that provide the foundation
of programmes of political and social action’ (Blackburn, S. (2016), The Oxford Dictionary of Philosophy,
https://doi.org/10.1093/acref/9780198735304.001.0001).