--- Professor Tim G. Benton ---

Sustainable agriculture and food systems Comparing contrasting and contested versions 40  Chatham House About the authors Professor Tim G. Benton is research director for emerging risks and director of the Environment and Society Programme at Chatham House. Tim’s areas of expertise include global food security, food systems and resilience, ecology and natural resources, and climate change impacts. He is one of the authors of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change’s special report on climate change and land and of the UK Climate Change Risk Assessments. He is also a professor at the University of Leeds.

Dr Helen Harwatt is a senior research fellow in the Environment and Society Programme at Chatham House. Helen focuses on food system shifts to identify pathways towards creating food systems that minimize adverse environmental impacts, maximize public health benefits and address ethical issues. Prior to joining Chatham House, Helen completed a research fellowship at Harvard Law School, looking at options for creating Paris Agreement-compliant food systems, and remains a visiting fellow. Helen has also completed research fellowships at Loma Linda University in California, and at the University of Leeds’s Sustainability Research Institute and Institute for Transport Studies.

Acknowledgments The authors would like to thank Ludivine Rebet and Owen Grafham, both of Chatham House’s Environment and Society Programme, for their programme management support; and Sue Pritchard, Jim Scown and Tom Burston at the Food, Farming and Countryside Commission (FFCC) for useful conversations throughout the project. We are very grateful to our anonymous reviewers for their careful interrogation of the paper. We are also grateful to several FFCC staff and research advisory group members for their detailed reviews. The authors are grateful to Vera Chapman Browne for her meticulous and insightful editing of the paper, and for overseeing the production process. Thanks also to Sarah Bunney at Soapbox for her work on the design and production of the paper. Finally, our sincere thanks go to the FFCC for its financial support of this research. The views and conclusions formed and outlined in the paper are the responsibility of the author(s). Both authors were involved in project design. Tim Benton wrote the initial draft, and both authors edited and wrote the final version.