--- Baulcombe, D. et al. (2009), ---

Sustainable agriculture and food systems Comparing contrasting and contested versions 9  Chatham House of sustainable intensification conceptually and theoretically may lead to significant and real environmental gains, particularly through system redesign and the adoption of agroecological approaches.10 As an academic field, ‘agroecology’ (a term often used to describe the relationship between ecology and agriculture) is ‘the integrative study of the ecology of the entire food system, encompassing ecological, economic and social dimensions, or more simply the ecology of food systems’.11 Agroecology is also used to describe how farming can work with nature and ecology to aid production, through supporting natural processes that enhance soil fertility, pollination or pest control, and it can include suites of practices like organic farming, integrated farm management and agroforestry. The term ‘regenerative farming’ has also recently grown in prominence, referring to farming that uses soil conservation to regenerate and deliver ecosystem services, and to enhance the environmental, social and economic aspects of food production.12 In this paper, the term ‘agroecological approaches’ is used to refer to natural processes that can support farming; such approaches can contribute to sustainability gains on intensive farms, without them necessarily converting wholesale – a process sometimes called ‘ecological intensification’.13 The two versions summarized in Table 1 are necessarily generalized, and it is perfectly possible to favour one version over another on pragmatic grounds (particularly Version 1, on the basis of ‘that is the way the world works’), rather than more explicitly on the basis of ideology or analysis. Nonetheless, the aim of this paper is to clarify the conceptual basis in terms of how the mode of agriculture is assumed to deliver sustainability at the level of the food system. The paper focuses throughout on sustainability in the broad sense of environmental sustainability, while recognizing that a range of wider social metrics (e.g. income and livelihoods, social cohesion or development needs) could be applied. In the following sections, each of the versions will first be described and then examined in detail. Each underpinning assumption will be discussed in turn, with the arguments made in support of each assumption being presented alongside the arguments against (the critiques). 10 Baulcombe, D. et al. (2009), Reaping the benefits: science and the sustainable intensification of global agriculture, London: The Royal Society, https://royalsociety.org/~/media/royal_society_content/policy/publications/2009/ 4294967719.pdf. 11 Francis, C. et al. (2003), ‘Agroecology: The ecology of food systems’, Journal of Sustainable Agriculture, 22(3), pp. 99–118, https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1300/J064v22n03_10. 12 Schreefel, L. et al. (2020), ‘Regenerative agriculture–the soil is the base’, Global Food Security, 26 (100404), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gfs.2020.100404. 13 Bommarco, R., Kleijn, D. and Potts, S. G. (2013), ‘Ecological intensification: harnessing ecosystem services for food security’, Trends in Ecology & Evolution, 28(4), pp. 230–38, https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/ abs/pii/S016953471200273X.

The term ‘regenerative farming’ has recently grown in prominence. It refers to farming that uses soil conservation to regenerate and deliver ecosystem services, and to enhance the environmental, social and economic aspects of food production.