--- Africa, India, and Australia. ---

The complexity of agricultural systems, including plants, their interaction with a local environment that
spans from the atmosphere to below ground, and the human context in both management and consumption,
presents numerous scientific and technical challenges in developing sustainable agricultural practices. The
widespread use of synthetic fertilizers, primarily containing nitrogen and phosphorus, for decades has
significantly boosted global food production capacity.4 However, a major challenge arises from inefficient
application of fertilizers, which contaminates the environment via leaching, particularly in water bodies
where it damages aquatic ecosystems.5 For example, crops utilize only around one-third of the nitrogen
supplied through fertilization, with the remainder lost through leaching and gaseous emissions.2 Phosphorus
fertilization has also exceeded crop phosphorus use with only 10-20% of phosphorus fertilizer being utilized
by crops.6 As we lack tools capable of providing real-time information on the internal state of plants and
fertilizer availability in the soil, we are unable to develop predictive models to guide farmers in effectively
managing their fertilizer usage. Moreover, there is a need for significant investment in breeding strategies
aimed at developing new varieties of plants with enhanced nitrogen, phosphorus and water use efficiency.

The complexity and global prevalence of agricultural systems can be addressed most effectively using
transdisciplinary research. Where interdisciplinary research integrates multiple disciplines to address
outstanding research questions, the NSF defines convergence research as the integration of disciplines to
address a specific problem, typically of societal importance. Here, we define transdisciplinary research that
involves convergent and interdisciplinary methods to co-create knowledge related to societal problems
among stakeholders and researchers.7,8 Transdisciplinary research is best suited to address this grand
challenge since it has the most potential for creating knowledge and solutions that can be applied in social
contexts, especially since its process relies on stakeholders and collaboration. In fact, transdisciplinary
research has been used to address climate change challenges in regions around the world, including Europe,
Africa, India, and Australia.9–11 Transdisciplinary research should thus be applied to other problems, such
as grand challenges in securing sustainable agricultural systems that meet the growing demands of the
future.

Transdisciplinary research will be necessary to address global challenges and coordinate meaningful
solutions in society. However, there is a need for more examples from biological and engineering
applications of how transdisciplinary and convergence research can be implemented. Below, we present
five case studies (Fig. 2) from two transdisciplinary and convergence research centers supported by the
National Science Foundation as Science and Technology Centers (STCs), i.e., Science and Technologies
for Phosphorus Sustainability (STEPS) Center, and Center for Research on Programmable Plant Systems
(CROPPS), that contribute to our ongoing efforts in advancing sustainable and resilient agricultural
systems. Collectively, our work spans across multiple scales. Starting on a whole-plant scale, we investigate
how environmental inputs affect plant communication (signaling) and utilize synthetic biology approaches
to harness this communication for reporting on resource availability. We then focus on the immediate plant
environment (soil) and explore new fertilizer technologies to increase the availability of phosphorus in the
soil. At a plant population scale, we develop tools for intimate interactions with plants to identify
endophenotypes for improved breeding programs in the context of nitrogen and water use efficiency.
Expanding to the ecosystem scale, we investigate phosphorus recovery from aquatic systems and develop
water resource management strategies to mitigate the harmful effects of phosphorus leaching. Finally, we
conduct research to understand stakeholder needs and priorities and incorporate these findings back into