--- accessing funding instruments such as the Green Climate Fund (GCF), the Global Environment Facility ---

1
Introduction
Nearly 690 million people around the world are hungry today (FAO et al., 2020). At the same time, more and more
people around the planet, including youth, are pushing for action on climate change. Thus, the question of how to achieve
food security while also adapting to climate change and reducing greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions becomes ever more
relevant. Agriculture contributes a significant part of gross domestic product (GDP) in many economies; 2.5 billion people
worldwide depend on agriculture for their livelihoods (FAO, 2016). Agri-food systems are believed to be responsible for
one third of global anthropogenic GHG emissions (Crippa et al., 2021). At the same time, the sector offers significant
potential to contribute to global climate goals (FAO, 2019a). Therefore, transforming agri-food systems (including crops,
livestock, fisheries, aquaculture, agroforestry and forestry) is pressing. This transformation should be achieved through
integrated, multisectoral approaches that are gender-transformative, inclusive and pro-poor, and harness synergies such
as those between climate change adaptation and mitigation. Agri-food systems must increase production in a sustainable
manner in order to meet the Sustainable Development Goals (FAO, 2019a).  
Against this background, climate-smart agriculture (CSA) is an innovative approach based on the following three pillars:
sustainably increase agricultural productivity and incomes;
adapt and build resilience of people and agri-food systems to climate change; and
reduce or, where possible, avoid GHG emissions.
CSA interventions have been implemented successfully around the world. This success is underpinned by the five
action points of CSA implementation, as formulated by FAO (FAO, 2021a):1   
1. Expand the evidence base to identify:

the effects of climate change on food production and on agri-food systems as a whole;

vulnerabilities in the agriculture sector that affect food security;

institutional and financial barriers and possibilities; and

climate-smart adaptation and mitigation options.
2. Supporting enabling policy frameworks by, for example:

developing relevant policies, legislation, plans and investments to support an enabling environment for CSA;

modifying existing policies where needed; and

coordinating policymaking processes to enable effective collaboration between institutions responsible for
agriculture, climate change, food security and land use.
3. Strengthen national and local institutions by, for example:

supporting institutions so that they can empower, enable and motivate farmers; and

building capacities of national policymakers so that they can effectively participate in international policy
fora on climate change and agriculture, and engage with local public authorities.
4. Enhance funding and financing options by, for example:

accessing funding instruments such as the Green Climate Fund (GCF), the Global Environment Facility
(GEF), official development assistance (ODA) and national sectoral budgets; and

creating innovative links between climate finance and public and private agricultural investment; and

integrating climate change in agricultural planning and budgeting.
5. Implement practices at field level:

selecting locally suitable CSA options by engaging local farmers’ knowledge, requirements and priorities.
1 This table is based on information available on FAO’s website at www.fao.org/climate-smart-agriculture/overview and on FAO’s Climate Smart Agriculture
Sourcebook, available at www.fao.org/climate-smart-agriculture-sourcebook/concept/module-a1-introducing-csa/chapter-a1-2 (module A1). The introductions
to the chapters in this publication provide additional elements related to each action point.