--- Save and Grow ---

65 These challenges have led governments to encourage farmers to use the diminishing resources more efficiently, and promote the better management and use of agro-ecological processes for the sustainable intensification of rice production systems (Abubakar, Ketelaar and Minamiguchi, 2015).

Save and Grow in Asian rice production means increasing efficiencies to produce more, higher-quality rice while using inputs more sustainably; this is to be achieved by (i) choosing more appropriate management strategies, (ii) building on ecosystem services, (iii) using inputs more efficiently, and (iv) conserving and using natural resources in a sustainable manner (FAO, 2014b).

Description In Lao People’s Democratic Republic, the project supported capacity building interventions through FFSs on Save and Grow for SIRP. This involved the testing, adaptation and demonstration of technologies and agricultural practices in FFSs. In the province of Sayabouly, a common problem faced by smallholder rice farmers is labour scarcity, especially during planting and harvesting, which are peak periods for labour demand. Against this background, the Laotian Government organized the testing of a drum seeder by smallholder farmers, with technical support from FAO. A drum seeder is a manual technology that is pulled by the operator; it is used to seed pre-germinated rice seeds in lowland and irrigated rice production systems (FAO, 2018a). The technology is gender-sensitive as it can be adapted for use by both women and men.

The FFS curriculum was revised during the implementation of the project to include appropriate Save and Grow innovations such as rice-fish systems, based on FAO’s project document (FAO, 2016b). The revised curriculum was pilot-tested over a rice cropping cycle in FFSs in four provinces in the country in 2016/17. The results of the FFS interventions were continuously assessed to collect evidence to guide future investments, and to broaden government policy support for Save and Grow-based SIRP interventions through FFSs in the country.

Outcomes The following results are based on a study carried out by FAO in the province of Sayabouly into the use of drum seeders (FAO, 2018b). Using a drum seeder for direct seeding (also called drum seeding) offers benefits over manual transplanting and broadcasting. These benefits include a greater resilience against the effects of climate change, higher labour productivity, time savings and a reduction of the work burden and of production costs.

Greater resilience to the effects of climate change Farmers who use a drum seeder can plant rice faster, which enables them to better cope with erratic weather.

Another benefit is that drum-seeded rice matures 10 to 15 days earlier than transplanted rice (Swiss Agency for Development and Cooperation, 2008). This enables farmers to plant their next crop earlier and profit from residual soil moisture. In cases where rice fields are lost due to droughts or floods, farmers can replant their fields using a drum seeder, without relying on (scarce) external labour or help from other farmers (who may be busy replanting their own fields). Furthermore, the drum seeder is suitable for agro-ecological approaches such as alternate wetting and drying and rice-fish systems. According to the International Rice Research Institute (2016), alternate wetting and drying helps mitigate climate change by reducing the amount of water needed to produce rice and limiting GHG emissions. Rice diversification methods, such as rice-fish systems, also increase the resilience of smallholder farmers against climate change.

Higher labour productivity and incomes The use of a drum seeder boosts agricultural incomes by 42 percent in comparison with manual transplanting (17 USD per day, compared to 12 USD per day, as labour productivity is high as compared to manual transplanting).

Labour productivity and time spent in the field for planting are the same for drum seeding and broadcasting.