--- (Cambodia, Ministry of Environment, 2015). Both ---

39 While Cambodia’s geographical and climatic features differ from those of Mongolia, the agriculture sectors in both countries face similar challenges. Cambodia’s location in the Mekong river basin and its tropical climate provide the basis for a range of livelihoods in forestry, fisheries and crop and livestock production. In 2015, the agriculture sector accounted for 28.7 percent of the country’s GDP and employed almost 45.3 percent of its labour force (Cambodia, Ministry of Environment, 2015). By 2018, the contribution of the agriculture sector to GDP had decreased to 23.5 percent, and the sector employed 37 percent of the total workforce (Cambodia, 2019). This decrease is linked to rural-urban dynamics and cross-border migration. Due to Cambodia’s reliance on rain-fed agriculture and its relatively low adaptive capacity to changing rainfall patterns, droughts, floods and pests, the country’s agriculture sector is highly vulnerable to climate change.

The contributions of both Cambodia and Mongolia to global GHG emissions are comparatively small. However, the agriculture sector accounts for a large share of these emissions in both countries due to its relative importance in the overall economy. Agriculture accounts for 48.5 percent of overall GHG emissions in Mongolia (Mongolia, Ministry of Environment and Tourism, 2018), and 41 percent in Cambodia (Cambodia, Ministry of Environment, 2015). Both countries have therefore focused on the AFOLU sectors as a priority area in their NDCs. However, their capacity to monitor and report on climate change programmes in these sectors is still weak. Self-assessments of national capacities carried out by the countries highlight institutional gaps (such as the absence of platforms to coordinate the collection of data or of harmonized systems for sector-specific reporting), as well as technical gaps (related to systems to measure, report and verify, and GHG inventories). CBIT projects help the countries address these gaps, particularly in the AFOLU sectors.

Description CBIT projects in the AFOLU sectors in both Cambodia and Mongolia aim at building the countries’ capacities to assess and report on mitigation and adaptation activities. They do this by strengthening institutional arrangements for ETF reporting and addressing technical needs. The projects address three of the key action points for CSA implementation, including:

Strengthening national and local institutions: CBIT AFOLU projects aim to improve national capacities to respond to climate change under the requirements of the ETF. Under the overall coordination of a national focal point, the projects work closely with key government institutions to strengthen capacities at the technical and policy levels.

The national focal points engage with other sectors that are crucial to the achievement of NDC targets and provide them with information on good practices.

Expanding the evidence base: CBIT AFOLU projects work to improve systems for the monitoring of GHG emissions and of adaptation and mitigation actions, and thus help strengthen the evidence base for CSA. These efforts support policymakers in the formulation of national priority action plans based on reliable data on emissions and on progress towards adaptation and mitigation. The projects assist countries with the identification of emission sources and sinks and the quantification of the emission reduction potential of the AFOLU sector. Under the projects, national stakeholders participate in training sessions and workshops (on- and offline) where they learn to adopt appropriate tools and methodologies for emission tracking (e.g. the Collect Earth tool). CBIT AFOLU projects provide quality control protocols (aligned with guidelines of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [IPCC]) in project implementation. Efforts towards climate adaptation involve the preparation of assessments to identify suitable methodologies and frameworks, as well as the development of parameters, indicators and quality control tools to track progress towards adaptation in the AFOLU sector.

Supporting enabling policy frameworks: CBIT projects help countries evaluate and improve existing policy priorities and targets for climate action in national climate policies, and particularly in NDCs. CBIT projects provide platforms where technical ministries can coordinate and organize interministerial consultations to discuss and reach agreements on issues related to national management plans and strategies. National governments receive help with the evaluation of regulations, laws, protocols or acts that are needed to reach NDC targets and comply with ETF requirements.