--- Reducing Goat Herd Predation in New Mexico ---

www.sare.org SARE 2023/2024 REPORT FROM THE FIELD 13 WESTERN SARE Reducing Goat Herd Predation in New Mexico The addition of goats either as a tool or as an enterprise to existing ranches is … expected to be a great option in the right circumstances.

Emily Cornell, Sol Ranch THE CHALLENGE There are many highs and lows of the ranching lifestyle, but losing animals to predation is a particularly difficult chal- lenge to cope with. Predators like mountain lions and coyotes can cause enormous economic losses if they go unchecked.

Sydney Franz learned this the hard way when she moved her goat ranch, K&C Boer Goats, from central Texas to Mora County, N.M., to establish multi-species grazing for land restoration and to earn additional revenue. With protection options limited due to finances, the ranch lost 24 percent of its goat kids between 2016 and 2017.

And while she and her partner were able to reduce losses to 14 percent in 2018 through modifications to previous protection meth- ods, they needed better solutions in order to keep the business and animals alive.

THE ACTIONS TAKEN K&C collaborated with fellow ranchers on a Farmer/Rancher grant project to improve herding techniques and reduce predation.

To trial their options in the first year, many of K&C’s goats were herded during the fall and winter, the period of worst predation, on Sol Ranch LLC, a neighboring cattle ranch operated by Emily Cornell with 5,000 acres of mixed open and rough terrain.

Coincidentally, fall and winter are also the times when brush and other unwanted weed species increase, so having goats forage the landscape served both the goats and the ranch. The goats returned to K&C’s Turner Ranch headquarters in the second year.

They were released with six livestock guard dogs and again suffered significant losses before Franz took over and began continual herding. Over the course of the project’s three years, the group significantly reduced predation through a combination of human herders, livestock guard dogs, herding dogs, night penning and in-shed kidding. Herders were particularly effective as they were bet- ter able to train the herd and prevent it from splintering into smaller groups and becom- ing vulnerable.

THE IMPACTS By adjusting their methods and using human herders, K&C reduced its animal losses to a consistent 6 to 8 percent each year. The trial also showed potential for whole-farm benefits like improved weed control and soil health. Specific impacts include: • Revenue opportunity: Incorporating meat goats to improve ranch landscapes provides an additional income opportu- nity for ranchers. • Improved rangeland health: Multi- species foraging offers soil health benefits as each herd feeds on different plant spe- cies; for example, goats will forage woody plants and cactus left behind by cattle. • Education and outreach: Despite difficulties with outreach due to the pandemic during the project period, plans are in place to share project out- comes at open-gate tours, meetings and workshops, and through like-minded organizations.

Learn more: See the related SARE project FW19-357.

Sydney Franz with one of the guard dogs that, along with other improved herding practices, have helped her reduce goat losses to predators.

Photo courtesy Sol Ranch, New Mexico