--- Training Farmers to Confront Racism and Inequity in Our Food Systems ---

www.sare.org
SARE 2023/2024 REPORT FROM THE FIELD 9
NORTHEAST SARE
Training Farmers to Confront Racism and Inequity in Our Food Systems
The goal of the 38-page Young Farmers
Racial Equity Toolkit is to help farmers
organize around transformative learning
and action.
The impact of the work funded
through this grant continues to
proliferate throughout our coalition
and our movement ecosystem.
Caitlin Arnold, National Young Farmers Coalition
THE CHALLENGE
Young farmers across the Northeast know
that racial inequity is deeply rooted in
American agriculture, which makes it
more difficult for farmers of color to secure
land, capital and other resources critical
to running a successful farm business.
Ninety-five percent of our nation’s primary
producers are white, according to the 2017
Census of Agriculture, and that number
is only increasing as more Black, Latino,
Asian American and Native American pri-
mary producers leave the industry. If we
are to have a just food system, it’s critical
that we reckon with systemic racism and
inequities, and that we acknowledge and
support the unique experiences and needs
of non-white producers.
THE ACTIONS TAKEN
Project leader Caitlin Arnold and the
National Young Farmers Coalition (NYFC)
secured a SARE Partnership grant and
focused their efforts on developing and
distributing a Racial Equity Toolkit that
tackles the issue of how racism operates
in our food system. It also provides guid-
ance and tools for starting conversations
about race, racism, equity and justice. The
coalition partnered with Soul Fire Farm of
Petersburg, N.Y., which facilitated three
anti-racism “Uprooting Racism” trainings
for 25 of the coalition’s chapter groups.
These trainings focused on identifying and
combating racism in their communities
and economies. Participants completed the
Racial Equity Toolkit and were connected
to local organizations engaged in anti-
racism work.
THE IMPACTS
This important work has led to the creation
of a functional resource for those looking
to dismantle racism within their local
agricultural communities. Specific impacts
include:
• Deepening conversations: The Racial
Equity Toolkit has been downloaded
nearly 10,000 times and has received
positive feedback from farmers and agri-
cultural service providers.
• Increased awareness: Training
participants reported taking action on
racial equity issues in their communities,
including educating others, improving
practices on their farms and engaging
in initiatives related to racial and food
justice.
• Resilient communities: Collaboration
among participants and likeminded orga-
nizations involved in racial equity work
encourages more just and diverse farm
communities across the country.
Learn more: See the related SARE project
ONE19-328.

Members of the Atlanta chapter of the National Young Farmers Coalition meet at Urban Sprouts
Farm for a skill-share event. Photo by Richie Graham