--- 3.4. Additional Resources ---

12 | Smart Prosperity Institute
3.4. Additional Resources
The following are additional resources that researchers,
practitioners, and policy-makers can draw on to further advance
awareness and understanding of opportunities for circularity for
Canada’s agri-food sector.

Selected Global Public Policies Supporting
Agri-Food Circularity
•
Italian Gadda Law: Passed in 2016, this law encourages
businesses to give surplus food away for free through tax
breaks, campaigns, and the streamlining of bureaucracy.79
•
EU’s Landfill Directive: Created in 2003, calls for a reduction
in the amount of biodegradable municipal solid waste
disposed to landfill. 80
•
EU’s new Circular Economy Action Plan: Adopted in 2020,
contains a section specifically pertaining to how circular
economic practices can be implemented to better Europe’s
food, water, and nutrient resources.81
•
Nova Scotia’s landfill ban: Announced in 2017, placed a
landfill ban on compostable organic material.82
Selected Documents on Circular Economy
and Agri-Food Sector
Understanding international food waste and the global
circular economy of food
Commission for Environmental Cooperation. (2017).
Characterization and Management of Food Loss and
Waste in North America. Retrieved from https://web.
archive.org/web/20201016234500/http://www3.
cec.org/islandora/en/item/11772-characterization-
and-management-food-loss-and-waste-in-north-america
With the goal of reducing food waste in the North
American commercial, industrial, and institutional
sectors, this comprehensive report proposes wide-
reaching strategies to reduce and recover food loss and
waste throughout the supply chain. It provides estimates
of food loss and waste, and its environmental and
economic impacts for Canada, the United States, and
Mexico, and outlines opportunities and considerations
for each of these countries in efforts to reduce food
waste.

Ellen MacArthur Foundation. (2019). Cities and Circular
Economy for Food. Retrieved from https://web.
archive.org/web/20201207132248/https://www.
ellenmacarthurfoundation.org/publications/cities-and-
circular-economy-for-food
This report, first presented at the World Economic Forum
Annual Meeting in 2019, outlines a vision for a new,
global food system for cities, where 80% of all food is
projected to be consumed by 2050. Built upon circular
economy principles, this report pictures a system in
which food is produced locally in a way that regenerates
natural systems, the economy makes use of food by-
products, and healthier food is produced. The report
predicts that achieving these goals could create global
benefits worth over C$3.5 trillion per year.
Understanding Canadian food waste and the Canadian
circular economy of food
City of Guelph & County of Wellington. (n.d.).
50x50x50 by 2025: Creating Canada’s first circular
food economy. Retrieved from https://web.archive.
org/web/20201207132631/https://guelph.ca/wp-
content/uploads/SmartCities_Booklet.pdf
The City of Guelph and County of Wellington aim to
be Canada’s first circular food economy through their
50x50x50 by 2025 initiative, which sets targets for
increasing access to affordable, nutritious food, creating
circular economy businesses in the food sector, and
increasing revenue by recognizing the value of waste.
This plan, which won C$10 million in Infrastructure
Canada’s Smart Cities Challenge, outlines specific
projects to help achieve each of these goals, and aims for
the city and county to be a place where stakeholders can
collaborate to implement circular economy principles
within the food sector.

National Zero Waste Council. (2018). A Food Loss and
Waste Strategy for Canada. Retrieved from https://web.
archive.org/save/http://www.nzwc.ca/Documents/
NZWCFoodLossWasteStrategy.pdf
Building on previous submissions of a strategy to the
federal government, the strategy presented in this report
achieved broad support during consultations with over
900 stakeholders. It calls for a national effort to halve per
capita food waste in Canada by 2030 through policy
change, innovation, and behavior change. The report
identifies key actions, which include implementing
a national target for food loss and waste reduction,
harmonizing government policies, and developing new
markets and products, while emphasizing the need for
collaboration between stakeholders.