--- | Smart Prosperity Institute ---

IV | Smart Prosperity Institute
This report aims to inform future research and policy
recommendations to support the transition to a more
circular agriculture and agri-food sector in Canada. It
synthesizes academic and practitioner literature on the
subject, including best practices, benefits, barriers,
and policy supports.
cultural practices. This starts with smaller-
scale practices which can grow into a
comprehensive and complementary system
overall.
• These practices take different forms in
different geographies and contexts. This
report identifies over 30 circular agriculture
and agri-food practices, categorized into
four objectives and 13 strategic approaches:
o Rethinking production and
consumption practices: by using
sustainable inputs; process
optimization; food loss and waste
prevention; reduced and alternative
material use; and sustainable
consumption.
o Intensifying the use of products:
by increasing the lifespan of food;
and redistributing food for human
consumption.
o Extending the life of resources:
creating new food, feed, industrial
and bio-economy products from
food loss and waste; and material
recycling.
o Giving resources new life: by nutrient
cycling; and energy cycling.

• Circular practices are hampered by many,
often mutually reinforcing barriers that must
be addressed across supply chains. The
presence of these barriers, found in markets,
finance, regulation and policy, technology
and infrastructure, culture and research,
presents the case for strong government
intervention to effectively unleash industry
initiatives for change.
• A full suite of public policy interventions,
across the full innovation chain, is needed to
drive a more circular Canadian agriculture
and agri-food economy. This includes
supporting the development of new
ideas through research, competitions and
challenges; financial and technical support
for the development, commercialization,
and demonstration of specific solutions;
stimulating market demand through
procurement, pricing and regulatory tools;
and coordinating the ecosystem of policies,
partnerships, institutions, and workforce
around a shared vision for greater circularity.
Transitioning to a more circular
agriculture and agri-food economy
is a multi-dimensional and complex
challenge that will require systemic
change including innovations in
practices, technologies, products,
and business and socio-cultural
practices.
Key Findings:
• The circular agriculture and agri-food
model intersects with other key agricultural
sector approaches, but also has distinct
components. Regenerative agriculture is
a key pillar of circular agriculture, however
circular agriculture and agri-food also
includes the processing, distribution and
consumption, disposal and recovery
of food. Like the bioeconomy, circular
agriculture and agri-food uses biological
and renewable materials, but further seeks
to also prevent, recover, or repurpose
waste.
• A circular agriculture and agri-food
economy promises economic,
environmental, and social benefits:
o Reduced costs of food loss and waste
management; increased revenue
from utilizing/selling food loss and
waste; and increased export-market
competitiveness.
o Improved soil quality; reduced water
requirements and improved water
quality; reduced GHG emissions; and
decreased land conversion.
o Improved health outcomes; lower
food insecurity; and job creation.
• Transitioning to a more circular agriculture
and agri-food economy is a multi-
dimensional and complex challenge that
will require systemic change including
innovations in practices, technologies,
products, and business and socio-