--- 4.3. Extending the Life of Resources ---

A Circular Agriculture and Agri-food Economy for Canada | 23
Table 2: Mapping of “Intensify Use of Products” practices onto the supply chain
Intensify Use of Products – Strategies and Practices by Supply Chain Stage
Strategies
Practices
Primary
Production
Processing &
Manufacturing
Distribution
& Retail
Consumption
Waste
Recovery
Increasing the
Lifespan of Food
Designing efficient transportation
and logistics
Using technology-based solutions
for increasing food lifespan
Using packaging solutions for
increasing food lifespan
Redistribution of
Food
Growing online platforms and
networks
Equipment Sharing
Sharing on-farm equipment
Grainnews 119
In an instance of successful equipment sharing,
two neighbouring farms in Saskatchewan share
a clearance sprayer. It was purchased with equal
investment five years ago and the cost of upkeep
has also been split. It was not obtainable for either
farmer individually at the time, but has been key to
their joint success.
Box 9
Box 10
Box 11
4.3. Extending the Life of Resources
Key strategies to extend the life of resources include new
products from surplus or unwanted food, new products from by-
products and material recycling.

New Products from Surplus or Unwanted Food
Surplus or unwanted food products are those which were
intended for human consumption but that are in quantities
that will not be consumed or have become unwanted due to
age, ripeness or condition such as bruising or discolouration.
Surplus food at the manufacturing stage can be used to create
new food or beverage products (Box 9). Within the food
industry excess products, especially fresh produce and animal
products, that are not in demand can be further manufactured
into new products (this is processing that was not originally
intended).120 For example, excess fresh fruit can be made into
jam.
Confiture Rebelle 121
Confiture Rebelle is a food upcycling start-up
that repurposes unwanted and surplus fruits into
jam and vegetables into chutney. The company
networks with local partners to collect unsold
produce and managed to recover 21 tonnes of
food in 2020. Their line of products includes 8
types of jam and 3 types of chutney.
These food products also have value as new
non-food products such as for the creation
of pharmaceuticals (Box 10), bio-pesticides,
bioplastics and others. Finally, surplus and
unwanted food can be transformed into new
animal feed products. This can include
feeding livestock with food scrap products
or collecting these food products for further
processing into a prepared animal feed that may
be marketed for farm or domestic animals.
GSK Pharmaceuticals 122
GSK Pharmaceutical in partnership with
Biorenewables Development Centre has
identified the opportunity to create high
quality glucose, a key ingredient in many of
their products, from food waste. This process
uses unwanted bread and potatoes to create
this valuable pharmaceutical component.
Commercial scaleup is under development to
bring the full value of this development to the
corporate level.