--- 3.2. Environmental Benefits ---

A Circular Agriculture and Agri-food Economy for Canada | 13
Reclaiming Lost Resource Value
Resource loss along the agriculture and agri-food supply chain is
largely considered business as usual. But over time the cumulative
cost of these untapped resources adds up and makes reclaiming
this lost value appealing to businesses. In Canada, avoidable food
waste is valued at $49.46 billion.62 Globally, the value of food
waste is estimated to be up to USD 1 trillion.63 While there are costs
associated with reclaiming the value of these resources, such as
labour, processing and transportation, there can also be sizeable
payoffs to realizing the value of these resources.
Circular practices implemented along the agriculture and agri-
food supply chain can help realise this value. For example, the
direct additional GDP contribution of harvesting left in field crops
in Canada has been estimated at $1.4 billion.64 Avoidable and
unavoidable food waste can be used as inputs for bio-based
products. These products are often highly innovative and provide
significant value creation. Examples of bio-based products
include bio-textiles, biofuels, bioplastics and bio-composites.
Finally, value along the agriculture and agri-food supply chain
can also be optimized by increased resource efficiency through
better water conservation and energy efficiency, process
efficiencies that lead to savings in energy and water use. For
example, the Sons Bakery in Brampton, Ontario, working with
the Provision Coalition, lowered the use of electricity by 12%,
natural gas by 6% and water consumption by 4%, and achieved
zero waste to landfill, saving $45,000 annually.65

Export-market Competitiveness
Canada’s agriculture and agri-food sector is export oriented: 35%
of unprocessed agriculture resource are exported, as well as 37%
of processed agriculture and agri-food resources. In the 2017
federal budget, Canada set the goal to increase agriculture exports
to at least $75 billion by 2025.66 In 2018, the value of these exports
stood at $59.4 billion.
As the global demand for sustainably produced goods rises,
the OECD has identified increasing interest and potential for
the circular economy to boost international trade.67 Therefore,
accelerating the adoption of circular practices in the agriculture and
agri-food sector, specifically in the primary production, processing,
and manufacturing industries, can create opportunities to increase
the competitiveness of Canadian products in the international
export market. It may also help reduce the likelihood of facing
future barriers to international trade and contribute to national
economic growth.68

3.2. Environmental Benefits
Circular practices in the agriculture and agri-food system
have documented environmental benefits, such as improved
soil quality and water quality, reduced GHG emissions and
decreased land conversion.
Soil Quality
Soil quality is an important indicator for the sustainability of
agriculture operations. A farm with good soil quality has the
potential for improved yield, higher resilience, and increased
biodiversity. Farms without good soil quality may be indicated
by low organic matter, high levels of erosion, low water holding
capacity, and reduced soil depth. Conventional farming can
result in soils that are of lower quality and rely heavily on the
application of fertilizers.
Implementing a circular approach to primary agriculture
production facilitates the development of higher quality soils,
through the application of regenerative practices.69 No-till
soil management for example can improve soil organic matter,
reduce erosion and increase the water holding potential of
soil. Cover cropping can improve soil organic content, reduce
erosion, increase soil fertility, reduce pest presence, and
improve yields. Such practices help deliver more resilient and
consistent yields with fewer inputs. Over the past five decades,
Canadian farmers have been significantly reducing the amount
of tilling and fallowing on their land which has led to an increase
in soil organic matter from an index value of 48 in 1981 to 74 in
2011.70
Water Quality
Water quality can deteriorate from excess nutrient loading as a
result of fertilizer application or livestock operations or pesticide
contamination.71 Excess nutrients can lead to algae blooms,
which cause dead zones that negatively impact the aquatic and
non-aquatic ecosystems that depend on this water. This also
impacts water potability.
The application of circularity and regenerative agriculture
practices reduces the need for pesticides, while regenerative
practices combined with precision application techniques
reduce the likelihood of fertilizer over-application. This in
turn can minimize leaching and the runoff of substances to
waterways, thereby improving ecological health as well as crop
yield.
Food processing and manufacturing may also contribute to
deteriorating water quality. Wastewater from these stages
of the supply chain can be high in fats, suspended solids,
nutrients, and chemicals, depending on the production.72 Food
processors commonly release wastewater to the public water
treatment system to be treated by the municipality before being
released to the environment.73
Circular economy practices can help improve the quality and
reduce the quantity of wastewater produced. For instance,
starch can be recovered from wastewater in potato processing
plants to improve the wastewater and recover value through
additional resource streams.74