--- Federal Office for the Environment, 2018). ---

54 Switzerland – piloting a goal-oriented farmer payment system for climate-smart milk production Introduction Switzerland’s agriculture sector emits 6 million tonnes CO2eq annually (2018), of which 3.3 million tonnes CO2eq are produced by cattle, the largest group of which are dairy cattle (Switzerland, Federal Office for the Environment, 2021). Hence, reducing the GHG emissions from dairy production plays a crucial role in the country’s overall GHG reduction strategy. The project discussed in this section, the climate-smart dairy farming project (Klimafreundliche Milch, literally “climate-friendly milk”), tackles this challenge. It aims at reducing GHG emission intensity (kg CO2eq per kg of fat- and protein-corrected milk) by 10 percent over the period from 2014/16 to 2020.

The project was created based on a participatory bottom-up approach that involved dairy producers from the start. It includes goal-oriented premium payments by Nestlé per kilogram of milk, based on effectively achieved GHG reductions.

Farmers are financially incentivized to implement GHG reduction measures to assure scalability with limited funding.

The project is a public-private partnership between the Swiss Federal Office for Agriculture, milk processor Nestlé and Aaremilch AG, a producer organization. Scientific support is provided by the Bern University of Applied Sciences. The pilot project runs from 2017 to 2021 (an additional phase might follow).

Rationale Dairy production has been present in Switzerland for centuries and is deeply rooted in Swiss culture. Switzerland’s large alpine meadows and small farm structures provide ideal conditions for livestock production on family farms.

Agriculture accounted for 12.9 percent of Switzerland’s total GHG emissions in 2017, with more than one third of all agricultural emissions caused by dairy cattle, mainly in the form of methane from enteric fermentation (Switzerland, Federal Office for the Environment, 2018).

Switzerland has pledged to cut its total GHG emissions by 20 percent from 1990 to 2020 (Switzerland, Federal Office for the Environment, 2018). Emissions from agriculture are to be cut by one third by 2050 (Switzerland, Federal Office for Agriculture, 2011). Nestlé, the world’s largest food and beverage producer and a major milk buyer in Switzerland, aims to achieve zero net GHG emissions by 2050. Together, these ambitions led to the formulation of the climate-smart dairy farming project.

Swiss farmers are economically challenged, as their income is far below the average income of the non-agricultural population. On top of that, climate change threatens biodiversity and even the entire sustainability of agricultural ecosystems in the country. ©Nestlé Suisse SA/Remo Nägeli