--- CSA practices in five states in Somalia, including Hirshabelle, Jubaland, Mudug, Puntland and South West. ---

17 Somalia − mapping climate-smart agricultural practices of rural women Introduction A 2019 study aimed at building the evidence base for CSA identified the planting of trees to conserve soil and water resources, the cultivation of drought-resistant crop varieties and the raising of mixed herds as just 3 of more than 80 CSA practices applied by rural women in Somalia. IFAD funded the study to guide the design of its agricultural programmes aimed at helping crop and livestock farmers adapt to climate change.

Rationale Somalia increasingly suffers from the effects of climate change, as drought and floods ravage the conflict-prone country in growing intensity and frequency. The Notre Dame Global Adaptation Initiative lists Somalia as one of the countries that are most vulnerable to climate change and least prepared to adapt to its effects (University of Notre Dame, n.d.).

There is little literature on women’s engagement in agriculture in Somalia, and not much is known about the CSA practices they apply. This is why IFAD funded a study aimed at identifying the CSA practices of rural women in Somalia. The study provides an evidence base for future IFAD-funded projects by identifying CSA practices that are effective at improving the livelihoods of poor smallholder households in Somalia.

Description The study described in this chapter was undertaken in 2019 by the Somali Disaster Resilience Institute, a national research institution based in Mogadishu. The institution carried out an extensive literature review, engaged with over 120 rural women through focus group discussions and interviewed 20 experts. Information was collected on CSA practices in five states in Somalia, including Hirshabelle, Jubaland, Mudug, Puntland and South West.

The study is part of IFAD’s wider programme of work in Somalia. Since the 1980s, IFAD has invested a total of USD 140 million in agricultural development projects in Somalia, reaching 1 780 000 direct beneficiaries. The organization has three ongoing projects in the country that promote the adoption of climate-smart farming technologies, the improvement of food security and nutrition, the sustainable management of water, watersheds and rangelands, and small ruminant and livestock development.8 8 The three projects are entitled: -Resilient Livelihood Action to COVID-19; -Food Security and Sustainability in Fragile Situations in Puntland; and -Productivity Enhancing Technologies to Improve Pastoralists and Agro-Pastoralists Livelihoods in Dry Lands in Somaliland. ©FAO/Isak Amin