--- The project Sustainable Management of Mountainous Forest and Land Resources under Climate Change Conditions, ---

67 Kyrgyzstan − sustainably managing mountainous forest and land resources under climate change conditions Introduction The project Sustainable Management of Mountainous Forest and Land Resources under Climate Change Conditions, financed by the GEF, is being implemented in Kyrgyzstan since September 2014. This project is executed by the Government of Kyrgyzstan through the State Agency for Environmental Protection and Forestry and the Ministry of Agriculture, Water and Regional Development, with support from FAO.

The objective of the project is to contribute to the sustainable management of mountainous agro-sylvo-pastoral ecosystems in Kyrgyzstan and improve their productivity, and thereby improve mountain livelihoods. The main components of the project include the improvement of the legal and institutional framework on forestry and land management, the reforestation and natural regeneration of 8 000 ha of forests and the improvement of the management of 20 000 ha of land, the promotion and demonstration of CSA (including climate-smart pasture management) on 20 000 ha of land, and the dissemination of CSA and other knowledge and best practices.

The project promotes new approaches and practices in sustainable forest and land management that are to increase the productivity of healthy forest systems and agro-ecosystems; this increased productivity is expected to improve the livelihoods of mountain people, including women and other disadvantaged groups that largely depend on agriculture-based incomes.

Rationale Pursuant to the Kyrgyz Forest Code, which confers an exceptional nature protection status to all forests in the country, the Government of Kyrgyzstan undertook a major forest management and protection initiative with the National Forest Programme 2011−2015. The GEF project strengthened the activities of the National Forest Programme in various ways. First, the project introduced innovative practices for forest rehabilitation and sustainable forest management in five pilot oblasts and 12 rayons. Second, the project raised awareness and improved capacities in the State Agency for Environmental Protection and Forestry on the global climate change benefits of calculating and monitoring carbon sequestration and reducing GHG emissions through forest rehabilitation and sustainable management. Third, the project strengthened the capacities of associations of users of local resources (forests, pastures, water) for the management of forest areas, and improved collaboration between them. The project also assisted in the assessment of the country’s existing forest policy (including the National Forest Programme 2011−2015) and the development of a new national “Forest Concept” for the period until 2040. The project payed ©FAO/Vyacheslav Oseledko