--- ], Nigeria and Tanzania [ ---

Agronomy 2024, 14, 2423 6 of 15 for the farm [22]. Similar interventions in which solar energy is harvested to power farm activities are reported in Niger [61], Nigeria and Tanzania [62].

Statistics show that over 600 million people in Africa live without access to electricity, although a significant number of them can still be served by cheap electricity generated at farm gates in various parts of the continent. There exists great potential for commercial biogas generation to both feed poor national grids and power farming infrastructure. Farms with biogas generation capabilities can, therefore, increase their incomes and productivity by generating biogas and distributing the surplus commercially [63]. The use of biogas as an alternative power source has been shown to mitigate the impacts of using fossil fuels to generate power in South Africa [64]. The identified critical barriers to commercial biogas development and production across the continent include high initial capital costs, weak environmental policies, poor institutional frameworks, poor infrastructure and a general lack of willpower to implement renewable energy policies and set challenging targets [63].

Smart irrigation practices have been reported to carry the potential to double food production in Africa. An analysis of the best practices from Ethiopia, Kenya, Mali, Morocco, Niger and South Africa showed that irrigation can double crop yields compared to rain- fed agriculture [31]. Although only about 6 percent of the cultivated land is currently irrigated in Africa, the irrigated land in SSA could be expanded from the current 7.7 to 38 million ha, compared to the total potential of over 47 million ha [30]. A report has described experiments on bundled “smart irrigation” technology that included improved vegetable varieties (tomatoes and sweet pepper), an automated irrigation kit and a low- cost screen house in the Babati area of Northern Tanzania, which resulted in 35% higher marketable yields, 25% higher gross returns, 35% labor savings, reduced soil erosion and water savings [29].

Rainwater harvesting in agricultural farms has been in practice in a number of coun- tries in Africa, mainly to either support irrigation programs or to supplement household and industrial needs at a community or family level. Rainwater harvesting has been shown to offer both benefits/opportunities and challenges to communities, although the oppor- tunities outweigh the challenges, especially in the semi-arid lands of Africa. Indigenous rainwater harvesting techniques, for example, have been shown to increase the water content in the root zone, and the appropriate design can diminish crop water stress in semi-arid areas of Africa [65]. Since its introduction in parts of Africa, such as Kenya and Tanzania, by non-governmental organizations such as the UN, rainwater harvesting has proven fundamental in raising crop productivity from 1 to 3–4 tons per hectare [66].

Composting, as a means of waste-to-fertilizer conversion, is practiced in several SSA countries. In one study, for example, optimized composting enabled the replenishment of soil nutrients and increased the capacity of soils to store plant-available nutrients and water in degraded banana-coffee-based farming systems in Tanzania [67]. A study that compared manure management practices on small, medium and large-scale farms in Ethiopia and Malawi confirmed the potential of manure to improve crop yields and promote sustainable agriculture in SSA, as well as highlighting that efforts to improve manure management in SSA should strengthen the enforcement of existing policies and provide an enabling environment for the adoption of good manure management practices [40].

A study in Tunisia reported that the combined application of municipal solid waste compost (MSWC), sewage sludge compost (SSC) and farmyard manure (FYM) increased the organic matter, cation exchange capacity and available P, Ca, Mg and K in the soil, as well as the grain yield (up to 51%) and the overall nutrient content of barley plants [68].

Similarly, the combined application of crop compost and FYM has been shown to improve the soil quality parameters in selected maize and cassava agroecosystems in Tanzania [69].

Research also shows that as farms intensify and become smaller through intergenerational subdivision, as is the case in communities living in the highlands of East and Central Africa, where population densities of up to 800 persons per square kilometer are becoming common [70], the need to enhance nutrient turnover is increased. This is because the soil fertility status declines sharply, presenting a serious threat to food security. In such