--- ], Ethiopia and Malawi [ ---

Agronomy 2024, 14, 2423 10 of 15 fertility. Composting, for example, was shown to be a good option for the conversion of biowaste into high-agronomic-value organic fertilizer with a high C/N ratio and other plant nutrients in São Tomé and Principe [88]. A study in Burkina Faso showed that the application of compost produced from selected household refuse, animal manure, crop residues and ash helped to improve the soil quality by raising the soil’s cation exchange capacity (CEC) and overall nutrient content, compared to soil that received no compost [89].

The intercropping of cereals and legumes—a circular agricultural practice known to improve the soil quality and productivity—is practiced in most SSA countries. Mbili-mbili, a form of intercropping in which two rows of a cereal are intercropped with two rows of a legume, was shown to result in high net revenues for farmers, in addition to improving the overall soil fertility status [90].

Similarly, animal manure addition to farm soils has been practiced with considerable success in improving soil health in some countries in SSA. Studies in Nigeria have proven that the addition of manure to soils can result in improved chemical and physical properties of the soil, in addition to improving the grain yields of crops such as maize [91–94]. The successful use of animal manure to boost soil health parameters and consequently crop yields has been reported in Tanzania [95], Ethiopia and Malawi [40].

The use of soil conditioners to help to decontaminate soils with toxic substances has been reported to successfully reduce the contamination levels and improve the overall health of soils. Biochar, for example, was shown to be extremely effective in the remediation of heavy-metal-contaminated alkaline and acidic soils as compared to charcoal or activated carbon [96]. In another study, biochar has been reported for its potential to enhance the soil and crop productivity through enhanced nutrient and soil moisture availability, the amelioration of acidic soils and the stimulation of microbial diversity and activity in a number of African countries [97,98]. On the other hand, calabash was shown to surpass five other phytoremediator plants in the removal of DDT from contaminated soil by phytoaccumulation [99]. A number of other studies have reported attempts to use phytoaccumulator plants to restore the health of contaminated soils in various parts of the African content [100]. Similarly, several studies have shown the potential of legumes to restore the health of degraded soils by improving their organic matter content and nitrogen fixation [100,101]. 6. Conclusions and Recommendations for the Future of Africa’s Circular Agricultural Systems Circular agriculture, as discussed in this paper, is a model that minimizes the amount of external inputs for agricultural production and closes nutrient loops while reducing the negative impacts on the environment through eliminating unwarranted waste discharges.

Recently, sustainability has become a global priority, and the stakes for sustainable transfor- mation in agriculture are particularly high in Africa. The circular agricultural principles and practices discussed in this paper carry the potential to transform sub-Saharan African agriculture and enable farmers to achieve sustainable production.

The future of African circular agricultural systems is, however, dependent on the development and placement of supportive infrastructure, including nationally governed programs aimed at equipping the agricultural sector with tools and innovative means of applying circular regenerative agricultural principles in production. Educating the farming community about the circular agricultural practices that represent the best approach in migrating to a circular economy could lead to the creation of a sustainable and more inclusive economy.

Author Contributions: Conceptualization, H.J.T. and B.R.S.; writing—original draft preparation, H.J.T. and E.W.S.; writing—review and editing, H.J.T., E.W.S. and B.R.S. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.

Funding: This research received no external funding.

Data Availability Statement: No new data were created or analyzed in this study.