--- Understanding Opportunities for Nutrient Recycling and Food Safety in ---

www.sare.org SARE 2023/2024 REPORT FROM THE FIELD 15 WESTERN SARE Left: Cattle waste left in grazing areas adds nutrients to the soil, promotes the growth of grasses and ground cover, and fosters dung beetles.

Right: Cattle grazing on the Jordan Ranch in Livingston, Mont., distribute their manure, urine and nutrients throughout the pasture. Photos courtesy of USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service, Montana This conference achieved the goal of connecting sectors of agriculture to safely share nutrients in livestock and poultry manures.

Joe Harrison, Washington State University THE CHALLENGE The Clean Water Act requires states to sub- mit water quality assessment reports every two years that include details on whether rivers, lakes, estuaries and coastal waters are meeting water quality standards. Pacific and Mountain Northwest states, includ- ing Washington, Idaho, Montana, Utah and Oregon, have reported varying rates of nutrient-related impairment in their waterways, some of which were very high.

While not all impairment can be attributed to agriculture, crop and animal production plays a significant role in the over-enrich- ment of our water sources. Agricultural professionals often lack adequate under- standing of nutrient cycling and recycling, rate and transport of nutrients across agri- cultural landscapes, and food safety related to irrigation management. To increase knowledge of how these important topics Understanding Opportunities for Nutrient Recycling and Food Safety in the West pertain to farm businesses and to regional water quality, Joe Harrison of Washington State University teamed up with profes- sionals across five states to host a confer- ence aimed at those who advise producers, including regional, state and local agencies and technical service providers.

THE ACTIONS TAKEN With support from a Professional Development Program grant, the organiz- ers identified 10 projects to be presented at the conference that addressed topics like technology for nutrient capture and recycling, carbon sequestration and stor- age, safe use of compost and manure in vegetable crops, nutrient cycling in grazing systems, irrigation management, and more.

Topics were chosen to promote the adop- tion of practices that encourage resource stewardship, particularly water. In-person training is a preferred learning method for farmers, ranchers and other ag profes- sionals, so the event was to be hosted in Boise, Idaho, but the Covid-19 pandemic necessitated a virtual meeting instead.

The October 2020 Pacific Northwest and Mountain West Nutrient Management, Food Safety and Soil Health Conference attracted nearly 400 registrants, and those who responded to a post-event survey indi- cated an increase in the level of their skills and knowledge related to the topic areas.

THE IMPACTS Though the event had to be held online, the virtual platform allowed for registrants to attend from locations across the globe.

Specific impacts include: • Worldwide interest: Participants reg- istered from six Western states, as well as from British Columbia and 43 other loca- tions across the nation and the world. • Online resources: The virtual confer- ence environment allowed for easy online access to session recordings and event resources for attendees and for those who were unable to participate at the time. • Future events: Participants indicated strong interest in annual or biennial pro- fessional development conferences on similar topics in the future.

Learn more: See the related SARE project WPDP19-10.