--- Page 12 ---

Agronomy 2020, 10, 605 12 of 16 harvest. Agrimats of various sizes and thicknesses are manufactured using forestry waste (thinned logs, woodchips, sawdust etc.) grass or weed biomass, municipal sewage sludge, algae residues, bagasse etc. [13]. Agrimats are laid out on top of the soil surface as organic mats or boards to serve as permanent soil cover that, inter alia, prevent soil erosion, preserve and increase soil moisture, moderate soil temperature regimes, improve soil quality and crop productivity as well as food security. However, it is important to note that other organic waste materials such as algae residues and municipal sewage sludge may contain high quantities of heavy metals that may pose hazards not only to crop growth but also to human health. Whilst preliminary work by Onwona-Agyeman et al. [13,50] has shown the advantages of agrimats over conventional mulch, extensive research is still needed to determine and quantify acceptable limits for the application of heavy metal containing organic materials in agricultural soils and how they can be incorporated into agrimat technology for better eﬃciency. In addition, the future research must also investigate the possibility of utilizing various weed materials classiﬁed as invasive species and/or allelopathic in diﬀerent quantities together with environmentally friendly organic materials in the agrimat fabrication process. Future research will also need to look at the possibilities of reducing toxicity levels in heavy metals and the allelopathic eﬀects of various organic materials using traditional methods such converting them into biochar or composting and innovative techniques prior to pressing them into agrimats. Moreover, future studies can investigate if the agrimats could prove a better and viable option for smallholder farmers as a soil conditioner compared to compost or traditional manures. Globally, there is dearth of information on how agrimats aﬀect soil microbial population and activity, soil pH and other soil chemical properties including soil fertility in general, including in Japan where the agrimat mulching practice was ﬁrst developed and tested. Onwona-Agyeman et al. [50] soaked urea-impregnated agrimats and compost-manufactured agrimats in water for 24 h and later found that urea-impregnated agrimats absorbed more water (77%) than the compost-manufactured agrimats (67%). Therefore, agrimats can also be used as a nitrogen use eﬃciency tool and provide a solution for semi-arid farmers weary of nitrogen fertilizers being lost through leaching as a result of erratic and erosive rainfall.

However, further ﬁeld research is needed in the future to investigate the decomposition rates of agrimats made with various organic materials and how they inﬂuence soil biology (including soil microbial population and activity) and chemistry. Generally, the rate of decomposition and mineralization rate of any organic material is controlled by many factors, inter alia, soil moisture, soil microbial activity, temperature etc. [42,51]. Therefore, the utilization of agrimats may allow farmers to use their crop residues as livestock feed or sell them to other farmers for proﬁt maximization. Several attempts by researchers to promote the adoption of CA to smallholder farmers in semi-arid regions has failed not only because of competition for crop residues, but also due to erratic and erosive hail storms that wash away loose organic mulching materials. In addition, the labor burden induced by no-tillage practice especially when herbicides are not used is unbearable for smallholder farmers. Rather, they believe that traditional tillage is a cost eﬀective practice for weed control with minimal or no use of herbicides [14]. However, agrimats are an innovative technology that will eliminate not only the need to control weeds or use herbicides but also reduce the cost of irrigation in semi-arid regions where rainfall is scanty.

In addition, considering the physical status and durability of agrimats compared to loose organic residues, they can also be used to address the concerns pointed by Giller et al. [29], who stated that “retention of mulch is not always possible”. They observed that in Mozambique, the mulch is often removed in a matter of weeks by termites. In such cases, agrimats mulching practice may delay the removal rate and allow the farmers more time to control termites eﬀectively. Therefore, future research studies will look at the viability of injecting coated pesticides into the agrimats in order to minimize crop failure in areas with severe cases of termites and other pest/disease infestations.

Although the agrimats serve as a permanent soil cover, they can be temporarily removed at planting to facilitate sowing and be laid back again on the soil surface after a week or so when the seedlings have fully developed. Currently, the most eﬀective method is to place the agrimats between the rows