--- Innovative Pro-Smallholder Farmers’ Permanent ---

agronomy
Communication
Innovative Pro-Smallholder Farmers’ Permanent
Mulch for Better Soil Quality and Food Security
Under Conservation Agriculture
Sibongiseni Mgolozeli 1,2,*, Adornis D. Nciizah 1
, Isaiah I. C. Wakindiki 2
and
Fhatuwani N. Mudau 2,3
1
Agricultural Research Council–Soil, Climate and Water, Private Bag X79, Pretoria 0083, South Africa;
NciizahA@arc.agric.za
2
Department of Agriculture and Animal Health, University of South Africa, Florida Park,
Roodepoort 1709, South Africa; iwakindiki@gmail.com (I.I.C.W.); mudauf@ukzn.ac.za (F.N.M.)
3
School of Agricultural, Earth and Environmental Sciences, University of KwaZulu-Natal, Private Bag X01,
Scottsville 3209, Pietermaritzburg, South Africa
*
Correspondence: MgolozeliS@arc.agric.za; Tel.: +27-12-310-2653
Received: 23 March 2020; Accepted: 14 April 2020; Published: 23 April 2020

Abstract: Soil degradation is the greatest threat to agricultural production globally. The practice of
applying or retaining crop residues in the ﬁeld as mulch is imperative to prevent soil erosion, maintain
soil quality and improve crop productivity. However, smallholder farmers resort to maximizing
proﬁt by removing crop residues after harvest to sell or use them as feed for livestock. Agrimats are
innovative pro-smallholder farming mulching materials that are manufactured using cheap or freely
available organic waste materials. These materials include forestry waste, grasses, etc., therefore
allowing smallholder farmers to make more proﬁt through improved crop productivity for better
food security. The most notable attributes of agrimats include their ability to prevent soil erosion,
increase and sustain soil organic matter, suppress weeds, and conserve soil moisture. Food security
challenge can be addressed by adopting agrimat technology as a sustainable permanent soil cover
to improve soil quality and crop productivity. Agrimat incorporation in conservation agriculture
practice could produce more food from less input resources (chemical fertilizers, water, etc.) with
minimal or no adverse eﬀect on the environment. This study aims to advocate permanent soil cover
using agrimat as an innovative pro-smallholder farmer technology to improve soil quality for better
food security.
Keywords: smallholder-farmers; agrimat; conservation agriculture; soil quality; food security
1. Introduction
The current global estimates indicate that about 80% of agricultural land suﬀers moderate to
severe erosion [1]. Moreover, approximately 30% of the world’s cropland has become unproductive
and abandoned due to soil erosion [2], leading to one in every nine persons in the world being
food-insecure [3] and about 66% of the global population being malnourished [1]. Ample evidence is
available in literature on the perils of soil erosion as a signiﬁcant threat to agricultural production more
especially in semi-arid regions [4,5]. Sustainable land management strategies such as conservation
agriculture (CA) have been identiﬁed and adopted in other parts of the world to prevent soil erosion,
improve soil quality, conserve soil moisture and preserve the environment but most importantly,
to match food production with the increasing world population [6–8]. A management system is
considered to be CA if it consists of the following three principles; (i) permanent soil cover through crop
Agronomy 2020, 10, 605; doi:10.3390/agronomy10040605
www.mdpi.com/journal/agronomy