--- 3.3. Agrimats: The Innovative and Sustainable Mulching Materials ---

Agronomy 2020, 10, 605
10 of 16

Figure 5. An estimate of CA adoption in South Africa [15].
Generally, the perils of soil erosion have led to soil loss from agroecosystems being 10–40 times
faster than the processes of soil formation worldwide, exacerbating the problem of global food
insecurity [1]. CA is among the top most eﬀective and sustainable management strategies that prevent
soil erosion, improve soil quality and conserve soil moisture but most importantly, to match food
production with the increasing world population [7,8]. CA has the potential to signiﬁcantly reduce soil
erosion and improved land regeneration but all the three principles must be implemented in order
for it to work eﬀectively [11,43]. For instance, Giller et al. [14] state that “When no till is practiced in
the absence of eﬀective soil mulch cover, the eﬀects can be disastrous with rapid surface sealing leading
to increased run-oﬀand accelerated soil erosion”. On the other hand, researchers and other proponents
of CA have failed to convince smallholder farmers and other poorly resourced food producers to adopt
CA because they prioritize the use of crop residues for livestock feed rather than soil mulch cover and
they prefer traditional tillage over no till for weed control purposes [14].
3.3. Agrimats: The Innovative and Sustainable Mulching Materials
Generally, mulch as a permanent soil cover decreases the eﬀects of raindrop splashes on soil
surfaces and hence slowing the detachment of soil particles and decrease the velocity of water on
the soil surface [2,5]. Mrabet et al. [22] states that “Soil cover is the most important factor that inﬂuences
water inﬁltration into the soil, thus reducing runoﬀand erosion.” In addition, vegetation or canopy
cover and plant residues protect the soil surface from water erosion by dissipating rainfall kinetic
energy and therefore halt runoﬀand sediment loss [44]. The continuous accumulation of plant residues
not only reduces runoﬀand erosion but also improves soil organic matter content, especially when
adopted with minimum or no till and crop rotation as practiced in conservation agriculture [7,22].
Moreover, mulch conserve soil moisture by acting as a sediment trap that reduce surface runoﬀand
enhance inﬁltration rate [5]. Dahiya et al. [45] conducted a ﬁeld experiment to investigate the eﬀect
of straw mulch and tillage in soil water and temperature regimes on a silty loam Typic Hapludalf at
the University of Hohenheim research center, Germany. They found that mulching decreased soil
water loss on average by 0.39 mm per day, while rotary hoeing increased water loss on average by
0.12 mm per day compared with the control. In an experiment conducted by Alliaume et al. [46]
in a Uruguayan sub-humid agro-ecological zone (with mean annual rainfall of 976 mm), in a with
silty clay sub horizon and silty loam top soil, mulching increased water capture by 9.5% and reduced