--- 2. Soil Degradation: The Biggest Threat in Agriculture ---

Agronomy 2020, 10, 605 2 of 16 residues or mulch, (ii) minimum soil disturbance or no tillage, and (iii) crop diversiﬁcation through crop rotation and/or cover crops [6,7].

Mulch is categorized as inorganic or organic with the latter being more commonly favored due to its biodegradable nature [5]. The inorganic types (gravel, polyethylene plastics, pebbles, etc.) of mulching material in agriculture are used mainly to control soil erosion and moderate soil moisture and temperatures, thereby increasing crop yield [9,10]. On the other hand, organic mulching materials (crop straw, grasses, sawdust, etc.) improve soil quality i.e., physical, chemical and biological characteristics by adding organic matter into the soil during the decomposition process [11]. The practice of applying or retaining crop residues in the ﬁeld as mulch after harvest is imperative in maintaining soil health and productivity [7]. Permanent soil cover though mulching helps to reduce run-oﬀby dissipating raindrop impact on the soil surface, thereby reducing soil erosion. Mango et al. [12] states that “Minimum soil disturbance and permanent soil cover help in improving soil organic matter content, reducing water run-oﬀleading to increased inﬁltration, as well as increased biological activity”. However, organic waste material applied as mulch in the ﬁeld can be easily washed or carried away by adverse weather conditions (high wind speed and high-intensity rainfall) in semi-arid regions [13]. Thereby leaving the soil prone to (i) rain drop impact, which leads to soil erosion through runoﬀ, (ii) high rates of evaporation due to high temperatures and (iii) poorly aerated soils because of low organic matter content in the soil. In addition, smallholder farmers practicing in sub-Saharan Africa (SSA) especially under semi-arid regions resort to maximizing proﬁt by removing crop residues after harvest to sell or use them as feed for livestock, a practice that has led to poor adoption of CA in sub-Saharan Africa [14–16].

To address the problem of loose biological waste materials being easily washed away by adverse weather conditions, Onwona-Agyeman et al. [13] used a pressurized steam and compression technology to produce stable mulching materials called agrimats from forestry residues and placed them in gentle and steep slopes in the ﬁeld. The results from the study by Onwona-Agyeman et al. [13] indicated that agrimats can reduce soil erosion by 94.4% and 92.3% on steep (30◦) and gentle (5◦) slopes respectively.

Moreover, agrimats absorb and retain more moisture (67–77%) for up to two days. Agrimats are manufactured using cheap or freely available organic waste materials such as grass or weed biomass, municipal sewage sludge, algae residues, bagasse and forestry waste (thinned logs, woodchips, sawdust etc.) and therefore allow farmers to make more proﬁt from selling crop residues after harvest as livestock feed or fuel [13].

This research study attempts to answer the following research questions: what is the best way to eﬀectively use diﬀerent and freely available organic materials as mulch to combat pervasive soil erosion, increase soil quality, improve crop productivity and food security with the minimum eﬀects on the environment? What are the main challenges that prevent smallholder farmers from adopting conservation agriculture? Google scholar was used as a search engine to gather diﬀerent scientiﬁc papers published over the past 20 years on the similar subject. Soil erosion, soil quality, permanent soil cover, agrimat, conservation agriculture, organic matter, crop productivity and food security were used as key words in the search engine to ﬁnd relevant articles. The aim of this study is to assess the status of soil erosion and address it using CA as a conservation technique with more focus on permanent soil cover (agrimat), which improves soil quality for better, sustainable crop production, and food security. 2. Soil Degradation: The Biggest Threat in Agriculture Soil degradation is a global challenge that threatens agricultural food production and food security [17]. According to Vaezi et al. [18], soil degradation is a consequence of the bare or scarcely covered soils in semi-arid lands. They further stated that “Approximately 40% of the world’s land surface is classiﬁed as arid or semi-arid regions. About 35% of the lands in semi-arid areas are used for agricultural purposes.” The decline in soil organic matter content due to drought and traditional agronomic practices employed by smallholder farmers has led to signiﬁcant soil degradation in semi-arid parts of Southern Africa [18]. In South Africa alone, the changes in soil fertility status and