--- Rural Development Programme 2014-2020’, which is funded by the European Agricultural Fund for ---

The Circular Farm by Charlie Steer
A Nuffield Farming Scholarships Trust report generously sponsored by NFU Mutual Charitable Trust

| 13

The “Soneco” electrode, marked DB2 on the front of the AOP “Advanced Oxidation Process” tank.
The system is a proof-of-concept trial with capital from the Welsh Government’s ‘Rural Communities
Rural Development Programme 2014-2020’, which is funded by the European Agricultural Fund for
rural Development and the Welsh Government. The system had, as to be expected during
innovation, been modified: for example a larger DAF tank was running in parallel to the original, and,
as to be expected, is constantly evolving. The concept is excellent and provides some clear benefits
to enable nutrient cycling and water reuse. Environmentally it reduces slurry storage volumes,
allowing targeted application in favourable weather and soil conditions and at the correct time for
crop nutrient uptake, reduced water abstraction due to the ability to re-use the treated water.
Financially the reduction in volume equates to lower capital for storage infrastructure, lower
operating costs for spreading and the displacement of manufactured fertilisers through efficient use
of manures. There would have to be careful analysis of the running costs and capital outlay for the
system, it would also require farmer training and supervision to run the system proficiently. If on-
farm renewable electricity could be used, the process’s ability to circulate and retain nutrients on
the farm would have a significant impact on the carbon footprint of production. This is enhanced by
the savings associated with effective use of organic manures as fertilisers over products made or
mined.
CCm Technologies
Fertiliser production and application is a large source of greenhouse gas emissions in agriculture. The
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPPC) has estimated that 6% of the emissions from
agriculture are from nitrous oxide (N20) and about three-quarters of those N20 emissions come from