--- Robinsway Dairy & Bucky Bloom ---

The Circular Farm by Charlie Steer
A Nuffield Farming Scholarships Trust report generously sponsored by NFU Mutual Charitable Trust

| 9
Over the past 50 or so years the specialisation of agriculture has seen livestock farmers
concentrating in areas where the factors for profitable production are favourable. Sitting in one of
the most densely populated parts of the UK for dairy farming in Cheshire explains why; the climatic
conditions, distance to markets (population), expertise, supporting business such as processors, vets
and contracting operations means that clusters of intensive and efficient farms using various
production systems develop and expand. This results in a strain on resources and in particular
overloading of nutrients on the environment. Recent changes to the farming rules for water in the
UK, coupled with the Clean Air consultation in 2018, will see regulation squeezing margins by
requiring compliance, management changes and capital investment. Across the world the story is
familiar, from counties in the UK, states in the USA such as Wisconsin and California to whole
countries, New Zealand, and Ireland. All facing similar challenges. The focus on nutrient recovery in
the livestock sector was a fascinating insight into the opportunity from manure.
“Where there’s muck there’s brass”
Robinsway Dairy & Bucky Bloom
Livestock water recycling (LWR) does exactly what it says on the tin. Their system uses three steps to
separate slurries or digestate into products that can be used back in the farming system, creating the
ever-desirable closed loop system.
Not dissimilar to separation systems, commonplace in the UK, the initial step is to remove most of
the large, solid particles through a roller screen separator. The solid stream is then a stackable, easy
to spread source of organic matter. This solid contains most of the carbon, so is well suited to
anaerobic digestion or composting operations. The liquid from the initial separation system then
goes through the LWR process. A flocculant polymer is first added to the incoming liquid and
agitated. This then causes the solid material left in the manure to stick together which can then be
mechanically skimmed off and added to the larger fibre from the initial screening. The next steps
involve filtration of the waste stream and finally reverse osmosis to purify the water, simultaneously
concentrating the nutrient in the waste stream. This results in three products, 75% clean re-usable
water, 17% concentrated liquid nutrients and 8% solids. In areas where water availability is scarce,
regulated closely or expensive the water is a valuable resource as a nutrient containing products.
At Robinsway Dairy in Wisconsin, the water is used to wash sand from a sand bedding recycling
system in addition creating a closed loop for bedding within the farming operation, for flush and
wash in the dairy and through centre pivot irrigators. The nutrient containing liquid is significantly
reduced in volume easing pressure on farm storage infrastructure. The consistency of the nutrient
rich product at a high concentration makes application of the 17% nutrient dense liquid portion as
simple as applying a manufactured liquid fertiliser. The consistency of the product has opened doors
for the Binversie family who now market the solid and liquid materials as a natural ‘organic’ fertiliser
for the home gardener, labelled as Bucky Bloom (www.buckorganics.com). They also use it as a
fertiliser on the farm in a conventional manner.