--- Chapter 4: Soil at the Core ---

The Circular Farm by Charlie Steer
A Nuffield Farming Scholarships Trust report generously sponsored by NFU Mutual Charitable Trust

| 22
Chapter 4: Soil at the Core
The soil is the centre of any farming system. The need for healthy soil to underpin a heathy society,
was highlighted by John Gilliland in Dowth with his summary of the benefits of animal nutrition for
the human diet, “one health” from soil to society.
“Yes, you are what you eat!”
Australian Graeme Sait has spent the past 25 years researching the relationship between soil, human
and planetary health. Graeme’s nutrition farming course is a well-structured immersion in the vast
amount of information Graeme has gleaned from some of the best minds in soil, health and climate
science including some now familiar names such as Joel Salatin, Gary Zimmer and his co-presenter
Joel Williams. The nutrition farming course covers soil health in detail, Graeme presents 10 reasons
to embrace biological agriculture:
1. Chemical agriculture is the definition of unsustainable, as more agri-chem used each year,
treating the symptom not the problem.
2. Using child health as a marker for the success of society. Child health is declining.
3. Monitoring of soil fauna has revealed a decimation of key creatures in the soil such as
earthworms.
4. Poor soil health leads to poor animal and human health.
5. Conventional agriculture is the biggest single contributor to greenhouse gas emissions.
6. The only saviour for climate change is agriculture.
7. Building humus is key to reversing climate change (1% increase in humus across US soils
would remove 4.5 out of the six billion tonne contribution to the problem).
8. Building humus is a biological process so anything to the detriment of that is unacceptable.
9. Systems based on oil (fertilisers, diesel, fungicides, herbicides, and pesticides) has a definite
use by date.
10. Passion is priceless in your chosen profession! (Graeme has this in heaps!)
One of the many take home messages was the need to build humus in the soil. Humus is the glue
which holds soil together built by microbial communities and contained in high portions in
composted organic matter, such as manure, green waste or vermicompost. The addition of these
products to soil drives the ability to store carbon and water, it impacts the nutritional values of food
as it can store all 74 minerals and hosts microbiology making these minerals available. Higher humus
allows the plant to self-defend from pathogens reducing the need for chemical inputs. It is a carbon
filter holding onto nitrate nitrogen and heavy metals. Finally, it improves soil structure allowing the
soil to breathe.
To be truly circular a farm must have the ability to cut out fossil fuel manufactured inputs. The need
to build humus and keep nutrients in the sil reinforces the circular principals to regenerate natural
systems to recycle organic material and not allow the escape of valuable nutrients or chemical
inputs from the farming system into the environment. Being savvy with the soil is a foundation of
the circular farm.