--- 6. POLICY TOOLS ---

A Circular Agriculture and Agri-food Economy for Canada | 29 Previous sections make the case for a transition towards a more circular agriculture and agri-food economy in Canada. However, this transition will not be easy to make. It is a multi-dimensional and complex challenge that requires systemic change including innovations in practices, technologies, products, and business and socio-cultural practices. This represents a tremendous opportunity to innovate and redesign our agriculture and agri- food system in a way that reconciles economic growth with our ecological limits.150 However, the presence of numerous barriers outlined in Section 5 suggests that the pace of this transition will lag without stronger government support. Such support is not unprecedented in Canada and can be seen in Canada’s ongoing clean innovation policy agenda. While this was designed primarily around carbon reduction commitments, it offers a comprehensive framework for understanding the broad range of public policy support that will also be needed to accelerate the transition to a circular agriculture and agri-food economy. 6. POLICY TOOLS The pace of the transition to a circular agriculture and agri-food sector will lag without strong government support.

An analysis of Canada’s needs for the transition towards clean growth identified four categories of government policies required to effectively unleash industry initiatives for change, described below.151 These are used as a basis for classifying the menu of policy tools available to increase circularity in the agriculture and agri-food sector, policy tools identified through a literature review.

The list is intended to serve as a menu of options for consideration, and deliberately stops short of recommending specific policy instruments or policy packages for Canada, pending further research and stakeholder input. The list is also agnostic to the level of government having jurisdiction to employ the policy tool.