--- Rethink and Reduce Material Waste ---

20 | Smart Prosperity Institute
At the retail stage, food loss and waste can be prevented by
improving the clarity of date labelling. Unclear date labelling
leaving consumers to decipher many different label formats,
meanings and date codes, may lead to misunderstanding
causing wastage. Standardization and simplification for
labelling on products can reduce the amount of food waste
thrown out prematurely as a result of caution and confusion.105
Improving purchasing models to ensure that stores are not
overstocking products due to the perception that consumers
purchase more product from fully stocked shelves and displays
is another way to reduce food loss and waste at the retail
stage.106
Food processing clusters are a cross-cutting practice that
allows for better and more efficient collaboration, particularly
between small and medium enterprises (SMEs). Clusters can
facilitate industrial symbiosis, encouraging the use of one
manufacturer’s waste (material or energy) as another’s input.
Clusters can also act as hubs for innovation and technology, and
to further develop the market.107
Finally measuring and tracking food loss and waste
by various stakeholders across the supply chain is key to
setting targets and goals to mitigate food loss and waste and
monitoring progress on these.108
Rethink and Reduce Material Waste
In addition to organic waste, inorganic material waste is another
key waste stream in the agriculture and agri-food sector. Food
packaging is a significant contributor to these waste streams.
While some packaging is necessary to keep valuable food
products safe and unspoilt, practices that reduce excessive
packaging can reduce the environmental footprint.109 These
include using compostable materials such as paper-based
packaging where possible, incorporating recycled and
recyclable content into packaging material, and as technology
and facilities allow, using compostable bio-based plastics or
plastic alternatives.
Another key waste stream in the sector is plastic from the use
of plant pots, fertilizer bags, haybale twine, and pesticide
containers etc. Conscious efforts to reduce and rethink the
use of these material wastes can prevent excess waste from
going to landfill and value loss. Material wastes that cannot be
reduced should be directed to material recycling to reclaim as
much content as possible.

Rethinking Consumption
Some food choices are inherently more sustainable than
others. Encouraging the selection of products that are more
sustainable through labelling, and marketing can increase
the circularity of the food industry. These include products
having a smaller carbon or water footprint, such as plant-
based protein alternatives and products that use resources
that are typically disposed of such as upcycled food
products.110
Conscious meal planning that incorporates locally or
seasonally produced foods can potentially increase the
circularity of food consumption for households, restaurants
and other food services. These plans can also work to
maximise the alignment of food service with the lifespan of
products and can incorporate cascading use of products
over time within the meal plan.