--- 2.2. Intersections with Other Key ---

6 | Smart Prosperity Institute 2.2. Intersections with Other Key Approaches A circular approach in the agriculture and agri-food sector has intersections with other agricultural sector approaches, such as regenerative agriculture and bioeconomy. These three strategic approaches share some core visions but have distinct components (Figure 4).

Regenerative agriculture is a key pillar of circular economy in agriculture,20 although the circular economy is broader, also covering the processing, distribution and consumption, disposal and recovery of food. Regenerative agriculture is the practice of farming in a way that restores natural ecosystems. This is achieved through holistic management which uses the power of natural element cycles to reverse and prevent ecosystem damage through human activities.21 Select regenerative practices include no-tillage, cover cropping, crop rotations, soil amendment with compost and/or manure and strategic grazing.22 Benefits of such practices include improved soil quality, increased carbon sequestration to the soil, improved biodiversity of soil microbes, insects and plants, and reduced run-off, reduced soil erosion.23 The concept of the bioeconomy shares the circular economy goal of using biological and renewable materials but lacks the circular economy emphasis on also seeking to prevent, recover, or repurpose waste. The bioeconomy encompasses all industries that deal with biological materials at different stages of the value chain: for example, agriculture, forestry and fishing at the primary stage; food processing, textile manufacturing and biotechnology in the processing stage; and retail and resource management in the consumption stage. It focuses on supporting the economy with more bio-based resources by integrating them in processes and products that have customarily used inorganic resources.24 Agriculture and agri-food can support the bioeconomy strategies of other industries by providing feedstocks and other resources.

Figure 3: Ellen MacArthur Foundation’s model of a circular economy for the food system19 Circular economy principles can be implemented through the entire supply chain from primary production to consumption and waste disposal, which requires a systemic perspective and the participation of stakeholders at every level.

Circularity in agriculture and agri-food can regenerate the natural systems that support agriculture, prevent food waste and pollution, and capture lost value. Unnecessary use of virgin resources is avoided by searching for opportunities to create new sustainable value from what is currently considered “waste” and capturing the highest value of all resources in the system. The circular economy in agriculture and agri-food is highly multifaceted, drawing on innovative technology, research and development, regenerative farming practices, public awareness, community involvement and more. Circular economy principles can be implemented through the entire supply chain from primary production to consumption and waste disposal, which requires a systemic perspective and the participation of stakeholders at every level.