--- 4.4. Giving Resources New Life ---

24 | Smart Prosperity Institute
Box 12
Box 13
New Products from By-products
By-products are resources resulting from the production or
processing of a product. The production and processing
of food products often result in the creation of valuable by-
products. These can be edible such as soy meal or fruit pulp,
or inedible such as corn stover or nut shells. The value of these
by-products is often not be recognized and captured in the
supply chain.123 When not used, these by-products can cost
manufacturers to dispose of and end up in landfills, emitting
GHGs. Alternatively, finding uses for these by-products can
turn a financial and environmental cost into a new source of
profit such as through the creation of new food or beverage
products (Box 11).
Dairy Distillery: Vodkow 124
Dairy Distillery is an Ontario based company
that specializes in converting unused dairy sugar
into an original vodka, aptly named “Vodkow”.
This dairy-based sugar is the result of the
production of ultrafiltered milk products that
would otherwise go to waste. Other sustainable
practices by Dairy Distillery include a lighter
weight packaging and an efficient production
process that cuts their carbon footprint by half as
compared to standard practice.
The creation of new non-food products
is also highly valuable. These products can
include medical materials, textiles, bioplastics
and building material.125 For example, orange
peels can be used to create textiles (Box 12), rice
husks and almond shells can be used to create
PHB for bioplastics, and cellulose from organic
waste can be used to create bio-resins. By-
products like agricultural residues such as stover
and stocks or nut meals from food processing
can often also be used to create animal feed
products.
Orange Fiber 126
Orange Fiber is an Italian start-up that produces silk-like
textiles from the peels of citrus juice. In Italy alone,
700,000 tonnes of by-products from citrus juicing
are produced, per year, and the disposal of these
by-products is costly. The technology created and
patented by Orange Fiber can create value out of these
resources. Their materials have been used in apparel
sold by H&M clothing.
Material Recycling
Inorganic waste materials such as plastic and aluminium from
any stage of the supply chain that cannot be reused can be
recycled where possible. Recycled materials can re-enter
the same process cycle or a different process cycle in either
an open or closed-loop cycle.127 Certain materials are more
efficient to recycle than others and product design can play an
essential role in increasing the success of material recycling and
the upholding of recycled materials quality.
4.4. Giving Resources New Life
Key strategies to give resource new life includes nutrient cycling
and energy cycling.

Nutrient Cycling
Food that is no longer edible or agriculture resources that
are inedible can be composted to reclaim nutrient value.
That can be used to supplement soils for crops or pastures.128
Composting is the most straightforward circular practice,
recapturing the nutrients from food and returning them to the
ecosystem for use in producing more food. However, since it
does not capitalize on the potential energy cycling of organic
waste like anaerobic digestion does, composting is considered
a lower-value commercial outlet for organic waste.