--- Achieving the Government of Canada’s ambitious growth ---

36 | Smart Prosperity Institute Achieving the Government of Canada’s ambitious growth targets for agri-food exports, concurrent with making progress on the government’s ambitions for net-zero emissions by 2050 and overall improvements in environmental quality indicators, means that more food will need to be produced with a smaller environmental impact. The circular economy, with its core principles of regenerating natural systems, designing out waste, and keeping materials in their highest use, is an effective strategy to meet these potentially competing ambitions.

While the circular economy has intersections with other strategic approaches, such as regenerative agriculture, promoting the bioeconomy and creating sustainable value from food loss and waste, it is a more holistic approach that offers a broad value proposition. By offering a framework to rethink many existing production and consumption patterns, it promises benefits to the economy and business competitiveness, and solutions for many pressing environmental challenges as well as greater societal well-being. In short, it has the potential to deliver a more profitable and sustainable agriculture and agri-food economy sector in Canada.

While there are endless ways to imagine how circular principles can be applied, this report draws from 4 overarching objectives for a circular economy to identify 13 strategic approaches and 34 practices specific to the agriculture and agri-food sector that find mention in many critical and highly regarded reports. These 7. CONCLUSION practices span across the food supply chain, encompassing agriculture production, processing, distribution, consumption and waste recovery, hinting at both the scale of the innovation challenge and opportunity it presents.

However, implementation of these circular practices may face barriers including market and financial barriers, regulatory and policy barriers, technological and infrastructure barriers as well as cultural and research ones, which the market alone cannot overcome. Hence government interventions of various types will be required.

The full suite of public policy support that can be put in place increase circularity in the sector is also summarized in this report.

In assessing and developing such interventions, Canadians have the opportunity to learn from the experience of jurisdictions that are well ahead in their adoption of circular agriculture and agri- food practices. Importantly, experiences in these jurisdictions demonstrate that government support should span the entire innovation chain from research to ideate new circular solutions; to using regulatory, pricing, and procurement policies to create market demand for these solutions; as well as offering early-stage businesses financial and non-financial support; and supporting the growth of wider platforms for the sharing of vision, partnerships, ideas, data and technology that will accelerate the adoption of these approaches.