--- Rescue - Human ---

A Circular Agriculture and Agri-food Economy for Canada | 9 Food loss: food that is intended for human consumption but, through poor functioning of the food production and supply chain, is reduced in quantity or quality.

Food waste: food for human consumption that is discarded (both edible and inedible parts) due to intentional behaviours.47 There exist many avenues to realise value from FLW. Many organizations that strive to recover food loss and waste use a food recovery hierarchy to guide decision making regarding recovery choices. This hierarchy (presented in Figure 5) prioritizes actions taken to recover FLW in a way that seeks to simultaneously optimise environmental, social and economic value. The first step is prevention, and all stakeholders have a role. For farmers, this could be better demand forecasting, sourcing network opportunities for labour shortages etc. For retail stores, it could be enhanced forecasting of sales. In hospitality and restaurants, source reduction could be achieved by conducting waste audits to identify and prevent waste, and at a household level, source reduction could involve meal planning and shopping using a grocery list. Surplus food, which is defined as food that is not being used for its intended purpose but is still safe for human consumption, can be rescued for human consumption and donated or processed into a product with higher demand or a longer life span.48 Food not suitable for human consumption can be fed to animals as food scraps or processed into animal food products, where laws and regulations permit. Resources that are fit for neither human nor animal consumption can be rerouted into industrial processing. This can include the capture of bioenergy and biofuels, the production of biocomposite products, biotextiles and other bioproducts.

Any remaining organic products can be composted to reclaim the nutrients. The last resort, for resources not suitable for composting, is landfill.

Figure 5: Food waste hierarchy adapted by authors from Commission of Environmental Cooperation; United States Environmental Protection Agency & Teigiserova et al. 49 01 02 03 04 05 06 Prevention Rescue - Human Consumption Recovery - Animal Feed Industrial Use Composting Disposal Most Preferable Least Preferable