--- led by Dr. Richard Grosshans with the International ---

18 | Smart Prosperity Institute recovery and wastewater recovery (Box 2). Organic waste can also be used to create pesticides from food waste. 91 For example, food scraps can be used to culture the bacteria bacillus thuringiensis which is a popular active ingredient in bacterial pesticides. Another example is the use of by-products from olive milling which can effectively protect against fungus, weeds and nematodes.92 These kinds of sustainable production inputs help maintain a closed-loop production system.

Another circular practice is the creation of livestock rearing inputs from waste. This can include the use of crop residues and food waste products as animal feed, or the use of dried anaerobic digestate to be used as bedding instead of crops such as straw.93 Phosphorus Recovery 94 Phosphorus (P) is a non-renewable resource, which has limited geographical availability. Because Canada has only negligible available phosphorus reserves, it is at risk for market supply and price fluctuations.

Phosphorus is an essential nutrient for all living things, meaning that plants and animals need to consume it from their environment. Due to this, a large amount of the phosphorus that gets imported is used to produce fertilizers. However, the application of fertilizer can result in nutrients being lost through runoff to watercourses, where the effect on the environment can be detrimental.

An excess of phosphorus in a body of water can cause algae blooms to occur, releasing toxins into the aquatic ecosystem.

In Canada, research into nutrient recovery has been led by Dr. Richard Grosshans with the International Institute for Sustainable Development and has primarily been focused on the Lake Winnipeg watershed. This research, completed over the past twenty years, has focused on the use of cattails planted in wetlands and watersheds to capture excess nutrients, as cattails are particularly efficient at taking up phosphorus.

The cattails are harvested from nutrient overloaded watersheds, which removes some of the excess nutrients. The biomass from the cattails is then available to be used as a feedstock for various forms of bioenergy, including anaerobic digestion and clean energy pellets. Once used to generate energy, the by-product, i.e. digestate or ash, can be used to recover the phosphorus and has the opportunity to be applied back to the agriculture industry as a fertilizer.

The cattail biomass costs less than wheat and grain bioenergy feedstocks, and just above the cost of wood.

The affordability of the feedstock is due in part to the lack of inputs that are required. In some jurisdictions, further economic value can be realized by the producers through generation of carbon offset credit for the use of a low carbon energy source.

Box 2 Process Optimization Optimizing the use of resources in production as well as processing and manufacturing can increase the circularity of the supply chain by lowering the requirement for virgin inputs and reducing the generation of waste and pollution. As discussed in Section 2.2 regenerative agriculture is a key pillar of the circular agriculture economy. By applying regenerative practices, farmers can stabilize yields while increasing crop resilience. Precision agriculture makes use of technologies to gather information about agronomic and environmental conditions to optimize input use. This can be supported using remote sensing, drones, and artificial intelligence (Box 3). These practices reduce the cost of inputs and prevent the likelihood of runoff and emissions from the soil.95 In agri-food processing and manufacturing, process optimization practices can reduce environmental footprints as well as operating costs. Food processing typically requires a large amount of water and energy. Implementing water management strategies for efficient water use can minimize water use, reclaim water where possible, and treat wastewater.96 Similarly, energy efficiency practices and the use of low-carbon energy sources can be put in place to reduce fossil fuel-based energy use and costs. 97 The use of renewable energy sources is another key pillar of the circular economy.