--- This work was supported by the U.S. National Science Foundation (NSF) under awards CBET-2019435 ---

Conclusion
With a changing climate, a growing population, and decreasing availability of resources such as water,
phosphorus and nitrogen, there is an urgent need to improve the productivity and sustainability of crop-
based agriculture. Transdisciplinary research has emerged as a research model that can address the coupled
scientific, technological and societal dimensions of this challenge in a manner that defines successful
convergence research. In this review, we highlight several case studies concerning the implementation of
transdisciplinary and convergence research, including research to develop reporter plants of below-ground
nutrient and water availability as well as integration of plant-microbial interactions as efficient strategies
for agricultural resource management. Moreover, plant-informed early optimization of new phosphorus
fertilization technologies is in development to help reduce the overuse of applied phosphorus fertilizer by
either improving soil phosphorus bioavailability or implementing more efficient nanofertilizer methods.
Integrating nanotechnology with robotics, we show how we can accelerate advancements in breeding new
cultivars. Finally, phosphorus recovery strategies are being developed using electrooxidation or
polyphosphate-accumulating organism systems to help resolve the problem of phosphorus contamination
of aquatic ecosystems. Each center has also identified stakeholder needs and barriers to adoption of research
projects to help guide their respective institutions towards advancing work that can successfully advance
their target societal goals.

As transdisciplinary research is implemented in future applications, it will be important to consider a
number of factors such as diversity in collaborations, cross-training among disciplines, and co-creation
with stakeholders.7,96 Transdisciplinary convergence research efficiently facilitates innovation as each team
can combine their expertise in new ways that, in isolation, they would not be able to implement in a timely
manner, if at all. For example, endophenotyping enabled by nanoreporters and robotics relies on
collaboration between engineers and plant biologists, while fertilizer biomaterial optimization relies on
collaboration between chemists, materials scientists and plant biologists. Both of these developments
provide new opportunities to engage stakeholders in the design of application-appropriate research
questions and technologies. Seeking out opportunities to co-create in multidisciplinary teams will thus help
bring innovative ideas to fruition without the need for an impossible task of one individual team building
expertise in all disciplines. Furthermore, innovation and technology does not exist in a vacuum. Social
factors such as stakeholder needs and perceptions, governmental regulations, economic factors,
environmental risks and practicality of using the technology all need to be considered.7,8,97. To do this,
stakeholder engagement and co-creation are key to guiding the focus of transdisciplinary research projects
in real time. Accordingly, collaboration with researchers within the social sciences is necessary to produce
meaningful innovations. Thus, transdisciplinary research implemented to its full potential brings efficiency
and direction to research and innovation towards solving complex global challenges.

Conflict of interests
The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the U.S. National Science Foundation (NSF) under awards CBET-2019435
(STEPS) and DBI-2019674 (CROPPS). V.B. is supported by the Schmidt Science Fellows program and
the Kavli Institute at Cornell (KIC) Postdoctoral Fellowship. I.M. is supported by the NSF Postdoctoral
Research Fellowships in Plant Biology Program through award number IOS-2305774.