--- . For example, CLE 25 ---

the Centers’ research efforts. By showcasing our transdisciplinary endeavors, we hope to encourage the
broad scientific community to join in this effort.

Whole-plant reporting of below-ground resources for improved crop management
Plants simultaneously exist in multiple distinct environments. For example, plant roots are embedded in
terrestrial landscapes, and their shoots inhabit the air. To coordinate their physiology between these
environments, plants have internal communication systems that enable whole-plant coordination and
resource allocation.12,13 These signaling communications exist across scales: within cells14, between cells15,
from root-to-shoot16, from leaf-to-leaf17, and between plants and their environment18. For example, CLE 25
(CLAVATA3/EMBRYO-SURROUNDING REGION-RELATED 25 (CLE25) is a small peptide that
moves through the xylem, from roots-to-shoots, to activate ABA-mediated drought stress responses in
shoots.19 Another peptide involved in long-distance signals is CEP1 (C-TERMINALLY ENCODED
PEPTIDE 1) that moves from roots-to-shoots to activate nutrient foraging in response to low nitrogen.20
MicroRNA2111 is a shoot-to-root small RNA signal that functions in balancing nodulation with rhizobial
symbionts.21 Plants also utilize rapid long-distance electrochemical (calcium ions and reactive oxygen
species) and hydraulic signaling waves that are initiated in response to environmental stresses and then
travel across the whole plant to induce stress resilience via systemic acquired acclimation.22,23 By leveraging
such diverse native long-distance signaling pathways, as shown in Fig. 3, we can gain access to information
from inaccessible parts, such as the roots, via reporters in accessible parts of the plant, such as the plant
canopy. Using approaches from plant science, synthetic biology and evolutionary genomics, we are
developing reporter plants that illuminate the hidden communication between plants and their environment
in real-time. By facilitating such whole-plant coordination, these reporter plants aim to transform our
fundamental understanding of plant communication, and enable timely and efficient application of
resources (e.g., fertilizers, water).

In addition to modifying native signaling networks to achieve these goals, researchers in the CROPPS are
also building orthogonal sequences that can overcome the sometimes undesired off-target effects of simple
switches based on native components. As such, synthetic approaches are being used in three major ways:
1) synthetic reporters that indicate the activity of native or orthogonal pathways, 2) synthetic switches that
toggle native or orthogonal pathways for a desired effect, and 3) a combination of synthetic inputs and
outputs that form a closed genetic circuit, which has been a successful use of synthetic biology tools in
microorganisms and plants.24–27 Together, such plant-compatible genetic circuits allow us to rebuild and
engineer signaling pathways in the native plant host. Synthetic reporters can also be potentially multiplexed
to allow a single plant to report on multiple environmental stresses or conditions, allowing for improved
crop management strategies and assistance in molecular phenotype-based breeding efforts. Synthetic signal
inputs can employ a combination of chemically induced genetic switches28 and state-of-the-art optogenetic
switches. Counterintuitively, the latter are usually derived from plant signaling proteins (e.g.,
photoreceptors) and were first used in in bacteria29. Only now are such optogenetic switches being
introduced back into plants.27 As an example, one of the first technologies developed within CROPPS
combines newly developed genetic parts (including optogenetic switches) and long-distance signaling
machinery, allowing for whole plant programming of below-ground reporting of nitrogen signals and
responses.