--- Page 176 ---

6). This constitutes 11 per cent of the total utilized agricultural area of Switzerland. From the point of view of sustainability, this trend is extremely positive.

Sales of plant protection products are an indicator of the risk of undesirable chemicals entering the environment, in particular water, soils and air.The quantity of plant protection products used in agriculture fell by 38 per cent between 1990 and 2004 (see Figure 7). Although it cannot be con- cluded that a reduction in the use of such products has a directly propor- tional effect on the environment, this marked trend must be seen as pos- itive from the point of view of sustainability, especially when taking into account the fact that crop production has increased in that period.

The indicator for excess phosphorus compares input to output. Since phosphorus is a non-renewable resource,its economical application has high priority with regard to sustainability. Excess phosphorus should be avoided wherever possible. The amount of phosphorus used by Swiss farmers fell by almost two-thirds while efficiency increased by a factor of three between 1990 and 2002.Both are welcome steps towards the sus- tainable application (see Figure 8).

The indicator for nitrogen efficiency again compares input to output in agricultural production methods. The nitrogen cycle is complex and dynamic,and marked losses between input and output are unavoidable.

It is estimated that with the intense agricultural production methods used today,the highest level of nitrogen efficiency that can be expected is around 30 per cent, owing to natural processes. In Switzerland, the nitrogen efficiency rate increased from 23 to 27 per cent between 1990 and 2002, which is again a positive trend from the point of view of sus- tainability (see Figure 9).

The indicator for energy efficiency compares energy consumption for production to the food calories produced.From the point of view of sus- tainability, energy efficiency needs to be improved and fossil energy sources should be replaced by renewable sources. In agriculture, energy efficiency has remained more or less unchanged since 1990 (see Figure 10).In terms of energy aspects,no progress has been made towards sus- tainability. Moreover, there has been no evident replacement of fossil fuels by renewable energy sources. It should be said, however, that agri- cultural policy has little influence on basic conditions with regard to energy.

The general picture regarding the ecological dimension of sustainability is as follows:

Sustainable Agriculture – From Common Principles to Common Practice 163