--- a policy model, the Canadian Regional Agricultural Model (CRAM), is ---

agri-sustainability indicators and the connections these indicators have with policy. An integrated modelling approach that links indicators with a policy model, the Canadian Regional Agricultural Model (CRAM), is explained.

The latter half of the section consists of contributions from the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) and the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) describing the evolution of agri-sustainability indicators,trends in agricultural policy and several lim- itations and constraints associated with the development and use of indicators. FAO provides a summary of FAO-related work and outlines a number of institutions and organizations for potential partnerships and networking.

Indicator selection, analysis and reporting, is typically guided by criteria and conceptual frameworks. In this compilation the frameworks described include: Driving Force-State-Response (DSR; Legg, this vol- ume); Pressure-State-Response (Strain and Lefebvre, this volume), which is essentially the same as DSR; and finally, a theme-based approach of equity, efficiency and resources (Bötsch and Jung, this volume). A broad array of indicator selection criteria are also put forward, including policy relevance, analytical soundness, measurability, feasibility and ease of interpretation (Legg,this volume;Sérvin,this volume).Besides helping to structure indicators, some of the frameworks—such as the DSR frame- work—can also help analyze causal linkages between different factors relevant for agricultural policy.

Amidst a proliferation of agri-sustainability indicators, various technical and institutional constraints are yet to be overcome, as discussed by Legg and Sérvin.Technical constraints speak to data quality and quanti- ty issues, such as requirements for relevant, up-to-date, reliable, consis- tent,coherent and interoperable data.Along similar lines,definitions and methodologies that enable broader standardization and harmonization are being called for, particularly when data are collected across regions and scales (Legg, this volume; Sérvin, this volume). Institutional limita- tions speak to high monitoring costs, lack of coherency, data access issues and the accurate interpretation of results. Many of these chal- lenges are also relevant for more research-oriented indicator efforts, but they are particularly important when indicators are to be operational- ized, and used more consistently for planning, analysis and reporting.

Understanding the effects of existing or planned policies are key con- cerns for all stakeholders in agriculture. Indicators can be used in con- structing integrated policy models that can help analyze the effects of Sustainable Agriculture – From Common Principles to Common Practice 152