--- Page 48 ---

1. Introduction Sustainable agriculture is a widely discussed topic by researchers and practitioners. The definition of sustainable agriculture ranges from con- servation and management choices (erosion prevention,integrated pest management, etc.) to national perspectives such as food security.

Assessment methods include counting the implementation of good practice (Goldmann, 1995) to a systemic analysis of interdependencies.

The goals for each of these views vary significantly and so do the indi- cators that can be used to measure the sustainability of agriculture or agricultural practices (see Smith and McDonald, 1998). In assessing the sustainability of the agricultural sector, the following problems are encountered:

Multi-functionality of agriculture. Agriculture has to fulfill multiple functions, such as, food security and landscape conservation. The main concern/main function of agriculture varies within continents, countries and regions.How can these goals be consolidated? Which functions and goals have priority? Panell and Schilizzi (1999) discuss competing objec- tives and the difficulty of measuring and assessing sustainability with respect to these goals. For example, it might be a goal to protect water bodies from pesticides and fertilizers, but at the same time, agricultural production has to be intensified to be able to supply the population with enough food.

Scales. The sustainability of agriculture can be assessed at different scales. Smith and McDonald (1998) identify four scales: field; farm; water- shed; and regional/national scale. At each scale, different perspectives and goals of sustainability are dominant and different indicators are required for the assessment. In addition, the global scale could be used to assess the effect of trade on the sustainability of national food sys- tems.

Selection of the appropriate indicators. The selection of indicators is also affected by the aspect of scale (Smith and McDonald, 1998).

Additionally,cultural issues play an important role.For example,Seitlinger (2006) shows that even some of the parameters that allow for a sustain- ability assessment of agriculture at farm-level in different countries of dif- ferent continents (Häni et al., 2004; Häni et al., 2005) are not necessarily adequate for doing so in the context of small-holders in Colombia,South America.Thus,one important issue is to differentiate between indicators that are not affected and those that might be affected by cultural con- ditions.The latter are likely to be related to social and economic aspects.

Sustainable Agriculture – From Common Principles to Common Practice 35