--- Page 77 ---

nent of the assessment approach. A correlation analysis was also per- formed between sugar cane yields (tonnes/ha) and the computed farm sustainability indices for the farm units.

Results and discussions The approach mirrors, in procedure, the farm sustainability index proce- dure used by Mandal et al. (2001) for sorghum (Sorghum bicolour L.), which represents a crop-specific analysis with only soil quality and cli- mate quality as key derivatives.The analysis of the spatial distribution of farm sustainability classes indicates that there is a regular relationship between the various land/land resources attributes and the farm sus- tainability status. There is however no clear spatial pattern of the distri- bution of the sustainability classes over the study area. The distribution tends to be dictated by the land attributes and is influenced heavily by socio-economic factors and land husbandry. Specific land attributes like slope, drainage and soil depth have their indirect effect on farm sustain- ability distribution in the area effected by land management and land improvements. The results suggest that the farm sustainability status (and production of sugarcane crop) is influenced by an interaction of several biophysical and socio-economic factors, which have been speci- fied here as farm sustainability indicators.The farm-level agricultural sus- tainability approach presented in this paper offers opportunity to classi- fy agricultural land with both qualitative and quantitative indicators while integrating spatial analysis and participatory investigation.

Because of the biophysical attributes included, the approach treats potential farm sustainability as the inherent physical quality of land resources for agriculture,and other functions of land as dictated by soils, climate and land cover. Actual farm sustainability is considered as the quality of land under prevailing management conditions and the socio- economic milieu.Table 3 shows the distribution of various farm sustain- ability classes (FSC) in Koru area.Figure 6 illustrates the results of ordinary kriging (ESRI, 2001) for two forms of farm sustainability based on the spherical model (ESRI, 2001) while Figure 7 shows the land attribute quality prediction maps for the individual farm sustainability indicator suites. In Koru, the potential farm sustainability presents a lower variabil- ity compared to the actual farm sustainability. Because of the relatively small area,the physical attributes such as soils,topography,water,climate and elevation do not result in a highly varied farm sustainability. The mapped high variation in actual farm sustainability is the result of land management,socio-economic status and environmental hazards (Figure Sustainable Agriculture – From Common Principles to Common Practice 64