--- Page 115 ---

4. Discussion on the IDEA method taking account of tests from case studies The indicator aggregation system The authors resolved,for reasons of pragmatism,to add together the val- ues of the different indicators, aware as they were of the fact that this approach implies compensation between the different components. In this way, favourable practices will offset practices with a harmful effect on such or such another component.This does admittedly constitute a real weakness for those focusing on the sole arithmetical value of the diagnosis. On the other hand, this addition does have a real meaning within the same component. For example, low animal diversity can indeed be partially compensated for by greater diversity of annual and permanent crops.

The scoring scales and weighting The most delicate aspects concern the scoring scales associated with each indicator and the weighting attributed to each indicator.This work was conducted by a multi-disciplinary group of French experts compris- ing about 30 people. Scoring and weighting were established on the basis of a consensus starting out with the macro-issues (the scales),then moving down to the level of the components and finally to the indica- tors themselves. The lowest possible score associated with most of the indicators is zero.This score can mean quite simply that the farm is not concerned by the indicator. In this way, the animal diversity or endan- gered breed indicators will concern only livestock breeding, while the indicators in the socio-territorial or economic scales concern all the farms.For farms that are concerned by the indicator,a score of zero does not necessarily mean an insurmountable handicap or obstacle to sus- tainability, but shows that the farm has room for progress.

The pertinence of the model The system of indicators proposed does not claim to be untouchable or to establish a model of sustainability that must never be changed. It has been drawn up using the expertise of a multi-disciplinary team working as a group and with the help of a large number of trips in the field.It has been tested for five years with many farmers,is the result of a consensus and seeks to give practical content to the notion of sustainability.

Sustainable Agriculture – From Common Principles to Common Practice 102