--- Page 68 ---

ing and monitoring farm sustainability. The RMD represent the focal areas used as extension units in Kenya.Stein et al.(2001) have presented approaches to down-scaling and up-scaling environmental indicators and have used geostatistical methods to determine the most appropri- ate scales for environmental indicators in space and time. Issues of scale have also been addressed by Bouma et al. (1998).

Since indicators play succinct roles in the assessment of farm sustain- ability and sustainable land management, the procedure adopted for obtaining them must be empirical and transparent. It is also prudent to consider spatial and temporal elements of farm sustainability, as indica- tors and threshold values are influenced by scale (field, farm, watershed, region,continent,global and time—days,growing season,years,decades or centuries) (Bouma et al., 1998). The integration of socio-economic issues in farm sustainability assessment is gaining equal impetus. By using participatory approaches (Martin and Sherington, 1997) such as participatory rural appraisal (PRA), participatory monitoring and evalua- tion (PM&E) and participatory impact assessment (PIA), social issues are almost integrated by default.Socio-economic factors are instrumental in LQA since science knowledge plays an important role in the assessment, but no more so than human values and actions.Bland (1999) argued for an integrated assessment method (IAM) for agricultural systems.

Integration of socio-economic issues in farm sustainability assessment protocols is not only morally appealing but is the missing link to assess- ing sustainable agriculture, particularly in developing countries.

The study area Site selection was done after a socio-cultural study of the wider Nyanza province in which Koru area falls (Ochola et al., 2000) and by drawing on preliminary indicators of agricultural sustainability and land degradation for an ongoing farm sustainability assessment work in Kenya.The area is around Menara in the Muhoroni division of Nyando district. The area is not representative in the statistical sense, but it is a typical case of focal areas targeted by the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development in its newly integrated approach to agricultural extension (NALEP, 2000) using the shifting focal area approach (SFAA) of agricultural extension. It was crafted out of the wider settlement scheme based on indicators succinct to the delineation of resource management domains (RMD), a definition which has been given by Eswaran et al. (1998) as a geograph- ical area that is homogeneous with respect to defined agricultural uses with similar physiographic boundaries and similar farm sustainability characteristics.

Sustainable Agriculture – From Common Principles to Common Practice 55