--- N&P Emission Potential EP (nine of 13 farms sustainable); and Plant ---

● N&P Emission Potential EP (nine of 13 farms sustainable); and Plant Protection PP (six of 13 farms sustainable): these indicators vary considerably among the farms due to different practices.

Deficiencies are due to high quantities of fertilizers (mainly organ- ic manure) applied on some farms that do not match with the crop requirements. For all farms an appropriate education for plant protection and especially integrated pest management (Boller et al,. 2004a; Häni et al., 1998) is missing, application units (sprayers, nozzles, etc.) are not inspected on a regular basis, and buffer zones along waterways and water sources are lacking.

Economic indicators ● Economic Stability ES: larger farms achieved a better performance generally regarding this indicator than small farms (_10ha).Five of the six large farms, but only three of the seven small farms, are considered sustainable with regard to ES.The debt burden is gen- erally low due to restricted access to credit. Only on five farms have substantial investments been undertaken over the last five years, but the state of the tea plantations is usually good. Some coffee fields, however, were in mediocre condition because they were neglected due to low commodity prices. ● Economic Efficiency EE: the economic efficiency of most farms evaluated is poor (only four of 13 are sustainable).The high val- ues of tea plantations in contrast to the low incomes result in a low return on investment. ● Local Economy LE: the well-maintained tea plantations are able to produce up to 25,000 kg of green leaves per year and hectare (equivalent to 5,500 kg of processed tea). This is suffi- cient to provide on average more than two regional employees with a regular, though low income, common to the region— Indian Gross National Income in 2003 was only US$540 per capita and year (World Bank,2005).Therefore,the LE indicator is considered sustainable for all evaluated tea farms.

Social indicators ● Working Conditions WC: due to the generally sufficient results for the State parameters (e.g., no child or forced labour, avail- ability of potable water and sanitary equipment) this indicator is considered sustainable for nine of the 13 analyzed farms.

However, the Driving force parameters were rather high. A big gap between potentially payable and effectively paid salaries, Sustainable Agriculture – From Common Principles to Common Practice 136