--- The World Food Situation:An Overview ---

Agriculture is one of the most ancient forms of art and science that ties human development and well-being to natural resources and ecosys- tems. Although trade in agricultural commodities can create an illusion of the separation between farmer and consumer, the two are in fact always tied together. In today’s characteristic mass market and long value chains, the links and interdependencies between producer and consumer are not immediately visible, or become visible only if supply and demand is out of sync.

As all farmers know, being in the business of farming is inherently risky.

Risk comes in the form of a myriad of factors, from pests and weather to changes in market conditions and government policies. Although sus- tainability has been defined in many ways, it can be thought of as an ability to manage risk without compromising human and ecosystem well-being over time. Managing risk is an ongoing enterprise and it requires constant learning and adaptation. It involves, among other things, regular monitoring of crop status and reserves, and market demands for commodities and specialty products. However, it also involves monitoring key aspects of agriculture’s environmental frame- work conditions, and understanding the social resilience and economic viability of farmers, farming communities and agricultural enterprises.

While agriculture is always risky, there are indications that the sector is entering a more turbulent phase of increased risk and uncertainty.

Amidst a mix of signals and interpretations,there appears to be warnings that profound change is needed to maintain or restore stability of the world food system.1, 2 Among forces of change, the policy issue that receives the most media attention is trade liberalization and the question of agricultural subsidies.

Changes in trade and subsidy regimes no doubt have major worldwide repercussions. However, sustainability concerns of the sector run much deeper. Some of these such as demographic change or consumption habits are set to virtually guarantee that the demand for agricultural commodities and more highly processed food will continue to grow.

Increasing affluence in countries such as India and China,partnered with an increasing demand for commodity-based biofuels, is expected to raise prices for dual-use food crops and lead to the more widespread use of monoculture. Others on the supply side point to increasing stress 1 Braun,J.von,2005,The World Food Situation:An Overview.Washington DC:IFPRI.Available at: http://www.ipsnews.net/news.asp?idnews=33268. 2 Leahy, S., 2006, Global Food Supply Near the Breaking Point. Available at: http://www.ifpri.org/pubs/agm05/jvbagm2005.asp.

Sustainable Agriculture – From Common Principles to Common Practice 21