--- 1 BSCI: Business Social Compliance Initiative. The BSCI is the European approach to ---

level allows for simultaneous research and development on the ground through a unique combination of research,extension and education.

Producer organizations may be particularly interested in assessing the situation of producers with RISE, and in identifying interventions and measures which can contribute to securing livelihoods and strengthen- ing their position in the market.

Development projects are at a first stage interested in the identification of entry points to improve the sustainability of agricultural production, (i.e., in determining where to invest efforts and funds). RISE assessments can be particularly useful for a holistic monitoring of the development and a holistic impact assessment with regard to measures implemented.

Political institutions are often interested in the identification of strengths and weaknesses in order to elaborate strategies to render agricultural production more sustainable.RISE assessments allow for such overviews, which also allow for the identification of changes to framework condi- tions (regulations, price policies and direct payments). To monitor the development of sustainability,a holistic assessment is particularly impor- tant, since evaluations focusing on specific aspects may lead to erro- neous conclusions about the actual conditions on the ground. Yet another interesting benefit of RISE for political institutions is that it allows for comparisons between different farming systems, sectors, regions or even nations. This makes it possible to depict specific advantages of location with regard to the sustainability of agricultural production and to communicate the message to relevant audiences (e.g.,to consumers).

The processing industry and retailers are interested in identifying bottle- necks, which could threaten a persistent supply of high quality raw material produced in a way acceptable to consumers.Therefore, holistic sustainability assessments can function as an early warning system and pinpoint potential measures to improve the situation.

For label organizations, RISE may also be of benefit (e.g., certifying organic production or BSCI).1 Label organizations can make use of the tool as a complementary add-on to certification in order to get a holistic view of the sustainability of the production of agricultural goods. Although RISE is not designed to serve as a certification instrument,it may add value to the cer- tification process (e.g.,as a monitoring tool and by assessing the impact of measures that have been initiated by the label organization). 1 BSCI: Business Social Compliance Initiative. The BSCI is the European approach to improve social performance in supplier countries through a uniform social standards monitoring solution for retail, industry and importers.

Sustainable Agriculture – From Common Principles to Common Practice 125