--- Agri-Environmental Indicators Report Series ---

1.

Update the existing set of AEIs by enhancing methodologies and underlying data when appropriate and possible, and developing new indicators to address key gaps in environmental information. 2.

Improve the quality and reliability of tools that integrate agri-envi- ronmental indicators with economic information. This integrated economic/environmental modelling provides an improved predic- tive capacity for testing scenarios,for example,to better understand how changes to agricultural policies and programs may affect the sector’s future environmental performance. 3.

Develop the capacity to quantify the economic costs and benefits of environmental impacts in agriculture,for both farmers and society.

The results from Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada’s work is published in the Agri-Environmental Indicators Report Series. A first report was pub- lished in 2000 (McRae et al.,2000),and a second report in 2005 (Lefebvre et al., 2005). 2.2. International collaboration Agriculture is linked to many global environmental issues, and agricul- tural products are a key element of global trade. Consequently, several international agencies are also working to develop and use environ- mental indicators for agriculture. Internationally comparable indicators are needed to better understand the health of the global environment, to guide and evaluate international efforts to reduce environmental stresses and to help ensure that countries do not distort global markets and enhance their competitiveness at the expense of the environment.

One international organization in particular, the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), is coordinating efforts among its member countries to develop a set of agri-environ- mental indicators that are based on consistent and compatible method- ologies (OECD, 2001). The development of environmental indicators at the international level is especially challenging because of differences in environmental conditions, economic activity, national priorities and the availability of data across countries. Through AAFC’s work on agri-envi- ronmental indicators, Canada actively contributes to OECD efforts and benefits from the ongoing cooperation and exchange of results with other member countries also working on the development of these indicators.

Sustainable Agriculture – From Common Principles to Common Practice 175