--- 2008 to 2012, and the International Convention on Biological Diversity ---

Switzerland and the U.S. have substantially increased the use of agri-envi- ronmental payments. An expansion in these measures started in the mid- 1980s and has continued. More recently, other countries, including Korea and Japan, have also begun to make greater use of these measures. Agri- environmental payments typically represent a modest,albeit rising,share of overall budgetary support to agriculture in these countries.

Many agri-environmental policy measures have been introduced in response to domestic, regional or local environmental issues. However, international pressures also look likely to continue to exert a growing influence over agri-environmental policy. These pressures include com- mitments relating to a range of international environmental agreements to address trans-boundary environmental issues, such the 1997 Kyoto Protocol, which specifies greenhouse gas (GHG) emission targets for 2008 to 2012, and the International Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD), which requires signatory countries to develop national strategies for conservation and biological diversity.

The diversity of programs across OECD countries and regions is vast.

Some notable trends include payments to support the adoption and maintenance of low-intensity farming systems,particularly organic farm- ing. Also common are land retirement payments to promote environ- mental objectives; payments linked to specific habitat or landscape management requirements; and transitional payments to assist farmers meeting the structural costs of complying with new environmental reg- ulations.A range of payment programs has also emerged in some coun- tries to address issues of climate change (for example, promoting the planting of shelterbelts for the sequestration of greenhouse gas emis- sions and biomass crops for bio energy production).

Payments are typically provided annually to farmers under fixed-term management agreements, with the amount paid being linked to the area of farmland covered, rather than specific environmental outcomes.

The intention is generally to reimburse farmer compliance costs on the principle of profit forgone, sometimes with the addition of an incentive element.Some programs also include the provision of training and tech- nical advice to assist farmers in carrying out targeted activities.

Many programs have attracted high rates of participation. For example, coverage under agri-environmental payment contracts reached almost 20 per cent of European Union farmland by the end of the 1990s. The growing prominence of these measures has invited increasing scrutiny.

A number of studies point to evidence of environmental improvements generated by these programs. for example, they have been variously Sustainable Agriculture – From Common Principles to Common Practice 204