--- Page 55 ---

● living from farming/farm income – ratio of agricultural income to the countries poverty line; ● living from farming/stability from farm income – standard devi- ation of the value added of a product; ● rural-urban justice – ratio of farm-income to non-farm income; and ● international justice – difference in revenues of a specific prod- uct in a country and average revenue for that product.

A less adequate indicator in our opinion would be: working hours vs. leisure hours (Mann and Gazzarin, 2004). One can compare the hours but—apart from culturally differing concepts of time—in different cul- tural contexts, working hours as well their perception of the sustainabil- ity vary (Levine, 1997).

Culture dependent indicators These indicators have to be adapted in their definition and data require- ments to the different cultures and sub-cultures. They might relate, for example, to social security, the probability of staying in an agricultural activity, or linkage to other parts of the food chain. Furthermore, vulner- ability, risk perception and knowledge are indicators that are related to social sustainability and are likely to differ significantly among countries (Smith and McDonald, 1998;Viklund, 2003). 3.3. Defining sustainability ranges for the selected indicators Sustainable development is a widely applied concept. At the UNCED conference in Rio in 1992,sustainable development was defined as “eco- nomic development that meets the needs of the present without compro- mising the ability of future generations to meet their own needs” (WCED, 1987). Since Rio, scientists and decision-makers have tried to opera- tionalize and put this concept into practice. Within science, three main interpretations of sustainability can be encountered (Laws et al.,2002):(i) sustainability is an ethical relationship; (ii) sustainability is the mainte- nance of a system within functional limits;and (iii) sustainability is a form of ongoing inquiry (Binder, 2005). This implies that sustainability is a dynamic concept and that it can be interpreted differently across cul- tures, as mentioned above (Lefroy et al., 2000; Zhen and Routay, 2003).

In Step 4 of the SSP process (specifying the sustainability ranges for the indicators), we account for this circumstance by defining sustainability ranges rather than precise numbers for sustainability. In defining the Sustainable Agriculture – From Common Principles to Common Practice 42