--- Page 67 ---

ers, indicators, when used effectively can flag important conditions and trends that can support agro-ecosystems planning and decision-mak- ing. Indicators enhance the ability of land users to: ● develop and use better land information gathering and report- ing systems; ● integrate environmental, social and economic attributes of a land system; and ● report regularly and reliably on the state and trends of land resources.

ASIs fall in the larger family of frameworks for natural resources assess- ment (FAO et al.,1997).The frameworks serve to organize the large quan- tities of resource management domain data for the development of indicators as well as promote their wide-scale use. Some frameworks have been developed in structures and formats that help measure the impacts of agriculture on the environment, like the logical framework approach (Uribe and Horton, 1993), the framework for evaluating sus- tainable land management (FESLM) described by Smyth and Dumanski (1993),technological changes assessment (Porter,1995),life cycle assess- ment (LCA) (Jonson,1996) and environmental impact assessment (Petts, 1999). The pressure-state-response (PSR) framework, development by the World Bank (Dumanski and Pieri, 1997) is useful for environmental reporting. It links pressures on the environment as a result of human activities with changes in the state (condition of the environment—land, water, air, etc.) as well as the feedback (response) due to societal inter- ventions to restore the state of the environment.The PSR framework has been applied in the development of several environmental indicators (Dumanski, et al., 1998; OECD, 1997, 2000).

Indicators abound in many forms (raw data, qualitative data, composite indicators and indices,textual information,etc.) so there is a challenge of selecting and implementing relevant and practical indicators. Although agro-ecosystems are composites of biological, environmental, economic, social, institutional and political systems, few indicators are representa- tive as many are sectoral.Indicator effectiveness may also be undermined by the dilemma of scale.The relevance and applicability of different indi- cators depend on the level of scale (Riley, 2001) and the perception of the land managers at each scale. Approaches to integrating complex facets into indicator definitions have been presented by other researchers (Pretty, 1995; Halberg, 1999). The proposed use of resource management domains (RMD) by Eswaran et al. (2000) treats scales as biophysical units ranging from farm to agro-ecological zones for assess- Sustainable Agriculture – From Common Principles to Common Practice 54