--- larly important in the European Union, Norway and Switzerland. ---

credited in Europe and the U.S. with reducing soil erosion, limiting pres- sures from input use, constraining pollution and overgrazing, and con- tributing to maintaining valued cultural landscapes and habitats.

Yet in certain cases significant shortcomings have also been identified in their design and implementation.For example,some payments have not been well-targeted and have been implemented without an overall evaluation of the associated costs in relation to the environmental bene- fits.For example,payments have been made available to farmers uniform- ly at a national level, yet the benefits have been concentrated locally or have been site-specific. Where payments have been implemented together with more production-linked support policies, they have been less effective at encouraging farming practices associated with counter- ing environmental problems.

Organic agriculture is expanding in all OECD countries to meet increas- ing consumer demand, although it still only accounts for a relatively small share of agricultural production and food consumption. Organic agricultural practices are generally considered more environmentally friendly than conventional agriculture, particularly with regard to lower pesticide residues,a richer biodiversity and greater resilience to drought.

Organic farming systems also hold the potential to lower nutrient run- off and reduce greenhouse gas emissions. However, there are situations where intensive management within organic farming regimes can impoverish biodiversity and animal manure can be applied in excess of requirements. More land may also be needed in some countries to pro- duce a given level of output,land which has alternative value in terms of its potential use as, for example, a natural area, depending on its current and historical use.

Measures providing payments based on farming practices are promi- nent and include support to farmers adopting low-intensity farming sys- tems, including organic production systems and other less input-inten- sive forms of production. Two types of payments can be distinguished that encourage organic farming: transitional per-hectare payment tai- lored to any income loss as a result of converting to organic production; and continuing payments based on area and headage to stimulate organic farming after the transition period. Such payments are particu- larly important in the European Union, Norway and Switzerland.

Coordination of policy approaches to organic agriculture, particularly when a number of different measures are being used, is reflected, for example,in the development of integrated action plans for organic farm- ing.While organic producers can benefit from traditional agricultural sup- Sustainable Agriculture – From Common Principles to Common Practice 205