--- Common Code for the Coffee Community (4C Association) or the Round ---

Here, INFASA is indeed filling a gap by initiating a dialogue between all involved stakeholders and across diverse policy and application con- texts. This dialogue should result in more focused coordination and harmonization efforts. It should also lead to improved sustainability assessment tools and their broad application from farm to higher orga- nizational levels. Options for INFASA’s organization and strategy were discussed at the Symposium, and they were further explored in a dis- cussion paper commissioned by IISD that looked at experience with major criteria and indicator (C&I) initiatives at the strategic level around the world and the potential lessons from these for INFASA.4 In the short to medium term,INFASA will continue to serve as a forum for sharing experience with measurement tools in different contexts, rang- ing from farm to higher organizational levels. Besides providing a forum for dialogue on applied research,INFASA can help identify and articulate problems such as those related to data availability, and communicate these to key players and initiatives dealing with such issues in a broader context. The demand for a strengthened evidence base highlighting results from implemented measures can be expected to grow for rea- sons outlined earlier. Therefore it is crucial to anticipate these policy needs in advance and actively address them.

It is equally important to understand both the needs and capacity con- straints of producers, and ensure that assessment tools required at the farm level are harmonized with the needs at higher levels and vice versa.

Given producers’ limited capacity and time, the use of assessment tools should provide an added value for the farmer by supporting his or her management decisions. Engaging the corporate sector is especially important given its increasing weight and interest in demonstrating real social and environmental responsibility to consumers, regulators and shareholders.Considerable efforts have already been made in niche mar- kets,and the demand for mainstream initiatives like the SAI Platform,the Common Code for the Coffee Community (4C Association) or the Round Table on Responsible Soy (RTRS) is increasing.

The INFASA Symposium helped showcase many of the most innovative tools and methods, but effective learning requires interactions between research teams over more extended periods of time, as it was already shown by C&I initiatives at the strategic level. However, because INFASA 4 Wunderlich, C. and A. Russillo, 2006, “Survey of Prominent Criteria and Indicator Initiatives at Strategic Level: Lessons Learned and Needs Assessment,”Working paper for the International Forum on Assessing Sustainability in Agriculture (INFASA).

Winnipeg, MB: International Institute for Sustainable Development (IISD).

Sustainable Agriculture – From Common Principles to Common Practice 244