--- Page 132 ---

about social aspects, leaves for environmental aspects, parts of the trunk for economical aspects), and some are completed for the territory.

The advantages of this new presentation include: ● more rigorous definition of sustainable development; ● visualization of the systemic approach of sustainable develop- ment; and ● more coherent symbolization relative to farmers’points of view (e.g., economy is shown as a pillar for farmer).

Farmers are managers: They need their own indicators Indicators for sustainable development are very necessary for political decisions at the supra-national, national or regional scale.

The Gross Domestic Product (GDP) has been the most-used indicator in the last 40 years used to settle, check and compare politics. Its limits are now underlined: indicators for human welfare, environmental respect, share of goods (between South and North countries for instance), etc.are necessary to balance the NGP indicator and throw light on the contribu- tion of societies to sustainable development. The aim is to complement NGP with indicators that take into account long-term and irreversibility risks.The development of such indicators is a major issue concerning sci- entists, politicians, NGO, etc. Once the indicators are established, societies will accept them and use them as they do the GDP. Of course, the more numerous the implied stakeholders,the higher the social acceptance (and use).Therefore, indicators for sustainable development applied to agricul- ture at the regional, national or supra-national level, should be developed with the participation of representative farmers.

At firm- or farm-scale,the stake is the same:managers need to anticipate future risks and adapt their strategies according to the evolution of the local and global context (for instance ecologist pressures, new needs of consumers, etc.). What is different is the way indicators are developed: managers need their own indicators,adapted to their own firm (or farm).

Therefore, indicators for firm (or farm) have to be developed by man- agers themselves.The need is not the indicators themselves but the way to develop adapted and adaptable indicators for each firm or farm.

Indicators for firms or farms which are not developed with (or by) man- agers often represent a means of control (to ensure respect for the law, for instance), or a means to gather information. As such, they are scarcely efficient in terms of developing a strategy and business plan.

Sustainable Agriculture – From Common Principles to Common Practice 119