--- Page 36 ---

strategies. Over the last 15 years, the expert community has made great efforts to build and improve measurement tools, and to develop and publish indicator reports and analyses. While probably useful in their own right,indicators are most useful when they are tied to strategic pol- icy cycles and the performance expectations of key actors. We cannot assume that general arguments about the need to improve measure- ment systems and tools will alone advance the agri-sustainability agenda.

No matter how advanced measurement tools are,they are only a means to an end,and without a clear link to information needs,policies and per- formance requirements, they will have limited impact.

The good news is that there is no shortage of policy issues that currently or will require a significantly improved evidence base. For example: ● Standards: As the emphasis on standards and certification schemes is increasing,the need to monitor adherence to these schemes, their impact and potential advantages will also grow. ● Value chain analysis: Due to longer value chains, the impact of agricultural production is often spread around the globe. From the point of view of trade, countries will want to know that some exporters are not enjoying an unfair advantage by simply externalizing costs (e.g., the environmental costs of produc- tion). This cannot be done without regular monitoring and preferably quantitative evaluation. ● Food security: As food demand grows faster than supply (at best),analysis and early warning of potential crises will become increasingly important. ● Full cost pricing and natural capital:The notion of natural capi- tal accounting has gained prominence. However, the calcula- tion of natural capital requires underlying physical data,such as hectares of land, soil quality or quantity of groundwater.

Indicators are the basis for these calculations. ● Sustainability reporting and strategies: Where these are being implemented,indicators are a must to help identify targets and report on progress. ● Budget processes: Measurement helps inform the budget process and establish priorities that minimize risk and facilitate adaptation. ● Impact assessment: To understand the impact of new tech- nologies or changes in production systems, indicators are needed at regulatory and farm levels, where decisions about technology adoption take place.

Sustainable Agriculture – From Common Principles to Common Practice 23