--- Page 164 ---

Introduction The development and use of agricultural indicators at the institutional level has been evolving over the past 15 years, with an increasing emphasis on pragmatic and strategic approaches. Advances in agricul- tural indicators,generally,have been driven by an increasing demand for better information, as policy-makers, producers, shareholders and the general public have become concerned about a wide range of sustain- ability issues.While information on economic performance in agriculture has generally been available in the form of macro- and micro-economic measures, the evidence base for environmental and social issues had to be significantly and systematically strengthened.

Parallel to academic research on indicators, governments and other organizations have initiated indicator programs that more directly address policy needs.Whether linked to the need to design,monitor and evaluate regulatory or market-based policies; to communicate trends to the general public; or to help track risks associated with supply chains, these efforts are ultimately driven by the need to regularly produce information that can be used in a practical context.

Nevertheless, the envisioned potential of indicators to inform decision- making effectively continues to be constrained by various technical,con- ceptual and institutional limitations. Similar limitations tend to appear across other sectors,and they are no less relevant for the agricultural sec- tor. They also appear across scales, whether one’s focus is on the farm, regional, national or international level. Authors in this section point to partnerships and networks as an important mechanism for the harmo- nization of efforts and learning.

Chapters in this section review indicator initiatives on the national and international level that are linked to a wide range of policy agendas.

Most are centered on indicators in physical units, but several, such as Strain and Lefebvre and Legg emphasize the need to develop monetary values to capture positive and negative externalities where feasible, as this helps design and calibrate economic policy instruments.

The first two papers in this section provide snapshots of agri-sustainabil- ity indicators at the national level.The Swiss Federal Office for Agriculture (FOAG) paper outlines the constitutional basis for monitoring sustain- ability; discusses a conceptual framework for sustainability indicator development; and provides recent data on agricultural indicators.

Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada’s paper outlines the development of Sustainable Agriculture – From Common Principles to Common Practice 151