--- Page 247 ---

es. Local private sector capacity can be enhanced by assisting farmers and other small businesses in improving their business knowledge and providing them with tools for better manage- ment; ● improved and sustainable agricultural production. Investment in primary agriculture is one way to increase incomes and reduce hunger. Over 70 per cent of the poor live in rural areas and depend on agriculture for their survival. Better technology and improved practices can help increase production and make it more sustainable; and ● more effective information systems.In today’s globalized world, people rely on various information systems to be able to com- pete in world markets and expand their reach. Market informa- tion systems for example, are essential to develop and expand trade in commodities.

Conclusion Global initiatives like the MEA and MDGs brought the importance of agri-environmental indicators back on international fora.Therefore,in the past decade, good progress has been made in producing and using such indicators to inform policy-makers about sustainable development issues.

However a number of technical and institutional barriers are still limiting further improvement. First among these is low investment in baseline geo-referenced data collection, especially at the sub-national level.

Establishing networks of experts, operating and connected at different scales, and strengthening existing institutional partnerships, could be a solution to improve the production, analysis, sharing and utilization of agri-environmental indicators.

The work on agri-environmental indicators has now penetrated both the private and public sectors and collaboration across these two entities and scales will be essential. Ultimately, these collaborative activities will strengthen our collective ability to communicate sustainability trends to the public and policy-makers. The impact of indicators will be deter- mined by the ability of these audiences to make use of them.

Sustainable Agriculture – From Common Principles to Common Practice 234