--- ers. Australia’s Environmental Management Systems integrate individual ---

practices to improve environmental outcomes. Most governments have general advisory services and employ extension agents to work with farmers on technology development and transfer. Advice is commonly in the form of codes of good agricultural practice, such as recommended maximum rates for the application of pesticides and fertilizers.

In the past decade new communication tools have been introduced,includ- ing the Internet and the use of demonstration or “model”farms. Over time, the provision of information has also tended to encompass an increasingly comprehensive range of information. For example, Environmental Farm Plans in Canada focus on developing risk-management strategies for farm- ers. Australia’s Environmental Management Systems integrate individual environmental farm objectives with regional targets.

In some countries—Australia, Canada and New Zealand—government- led information policies are supplemented by the growing use of com- munity-based approaches promoting the exchange and transfer of information, variously known as landcare groups or conservation clubs.

These approaches make use of local expertise in solving environmental problems that thereby enhance environmental conservation, and rely upon the self interest of farmers. Such groups seem especially well-suit- ed to address issues that are local in nature, but which extend beyond the borders of a single farm.Some of these groups receive administrative or financial support from central or regional authorities, while others are entirely self-financed and independent.

Product information In the past decade, greater attention has also been directed at providing information on the environmental attributes of commodity outputs in order to meet the demands of an increasingly well-informed and discrim- inating public. In particular, standards for “eco-labels” have been estab- lished in many OECD countries, backed-up by certification processes to verify their authenticity,in order to assist customers in distinguishing com- modities grown without chemical fertilizers or pesticides from conven- tionally-produced agricultural commodities. Products from such com- modities tend to command discernible price premiums in many markets.

Some of these eco-labelling schemes are entirely market-based, often introduced by producer groups at the behest of supermarkets or other retailers.Others are government-backed.For example,a large number of OECD countries—including Australia, the European Union, Canada, Norway, the U.S. and Switzerland—have introduced government- enforced national organic labelling standards.

Sustainable Agriculture – From Common Principles to Common Practice 211