--- rainfall (Table S3 Supplementary material). ---

Soil Security 13 (2023) 100119 4 Motives for agronomic investments in greater soil fertility Although soil fertility was generally considered important, there were differences in the rationale for its importance. Farmers (Fig. 1) and agricultural institutionalists (Fig. 2) were asked about their motives for agronomic investments in greater soil fertility. There were seven mo tives (or reasons) to choose from, which were rated based on a four-point Likert rating scale (very important, important, less important, and un important). For 61 % of the farmers and 66 % of the institutionalists, increasing the climate resilience (abiotic stress tolerance) of cropping systems was found to be most important. The motive of increasing yield stability in crop production ranked second amongst farmers (61 %) and institutionalists (57 %). Contributing to environmental protection and saving chemical-synthetic inputs were also found to be important rea sons, receiving votes from 35/36 % of farmers and 40 % of agricultural institutionalists. In comparison, contributions to climate protection, for example by C sequestration, or increasing yield level were rated of less importance by both groups (19–32 %). Overall, 13–15 % of farmers and institutionalists abstained from answering this question. In the bivariate analyses, the farmers’ motives for agronomic investments in greater soil fertility showed no significant dependence on their stated on-farm conditions, including soil quality index and the average sum of annual rainfall (Table S3 Supplementary material).

In addition, several participants (n = 64) made comments about other objectives and motives for agronomic investments in greater soil fertility. From this, it became clear that the provision of ecosystem services, such as erosion and flood control, and filtering and buffering functions are especially important for achieving high water quality and soil water storage. The contributions of these factors to the production of healthy, high-quality, and nutrient-rich food and feed as well as the protection of soil biodiversity (including habitat functions and soil or ganisms) were also given high priority by the respondents (n = 32).

Finally, the careful use of finite resources and energy as well as cost savings were mentioned as important motives. These comments can be summarized by the following quote from the survey: ’healthy soil—healthy plant—healthy human’.

Improved soil properties expected from greater soil fertility To determine which soil properties were expected to be improved as a result of greater soil fertility, eleven soil properties were presented to the respondents. These were also rated based on a four-point Likert scale (very important, important, less important, and unimportant). Over half of the farmers (52 %) found the water holding capacity of the soil to be positively affected by soil fertility promotion (Fig. 3). This was followed in the ranking of effect relevance by rootability (50 %) and soil bio logical activity (49 %). In comparison, soil air and temperature balance (24 %) and soil workability/trafficability (20 %) were considered to have rather low importance amongst farmers. Overall, a higher number of farmers (27–28 %) abstained from answering this question.

In the bivariate analyses, the farmers’ assessment of improved soil properties expected from greater soil fertility showed no significant dependence on their stated on-farm conditions (co-variables: soil quality index and average sum of annual rainfall), except for the water storage capacity and aggregate stability, which were both related to the rainfall co-variable (Table 3). Here, with a lower rainfall amount, the water storage capacity was rated of higher importance by farmers (rho = −0.12; negative correlation). For aggregate stability, a different dependence was observed: the larger the amount of rainfall, the higher the importance of aggregate stability (rho = +0.12; positive correlation).

The agricultural institutionalists gave similar opinions to the farmers, particularly for the top three ranked soil properties (Fig. 4). The water storage capacity of the soil received 59 % of the votes, indicating that it was of highest importance. With 47 % of the votes, soil biological activity came in second, while rootability came in third with 45 %. This was closely followed by the water infiltration capacity, soil organic matter content, plant health, and aggregate stability in the same order as that for farmers. Better soil workability/trafficability (18 %) was also considered the soil property with the least importance by the in stitutionalists. A total of 20–21 % of the institutionalists abstained from answering this question.

The participants were given the opportunity to add additional soil properties that they expected to increase with greater soil fertility. In the comments (n = 24), soil structure and crumb stability were emphasized above other factors in terms of preventing erosion and thus the loss of soil as an essential natural resource. Additionally, the respondents stated that biological soil components and the promotion of soil biodiversity Table 2 Cross table comparing the importance of soil fertility in the present and future.

Present/ Future Unimportant (%) Less Important (%) Important (%) Very Important (%) Unimportant Less Important Important Very Important 0,2 0 0,3 0 0 21 0,3 0 0 1 11 1 0,2 1 18 46 All participants included (n = 585, 370 farmers and 215 agricultural institutionalists).

Fig. 1. Evaluation of farmers’ motives for agronomic investments in greater soil fertility (n = 370).

M.K. Wolf et al.