--- Gaps: How will we fill ---

Gaps: How will we fill workforce gaps?

Next, think about how you will fill current and future workforce gaps. In other words, begin building your human resources strategy. You could: • Redefine tasks for the current workforce. • Add new labor to the workforce. • Access additional labor through work-trade, contracting, or new business arrangements. • Substitute capital for labor.

Will you shift responsibilities or reassign tasks among your current workforce? Will you hire family or community members to fill new jobs?

Will you reorganize the business to reduce your own workload? Any one of these strategies may be appropriate for your business depending on the values and goals identified by your planning team, your financial picture, and the skills of your current workforce.

The labor strategy that you choose will depend on how much of a gap exists between your current workforce and your projected workforce needs.

For instance, if most of your projected labor needs can be met through your current workforce, you may decide to hire part-time workers or custom operators to meet seasonal bottlenecks or remaining needs. On the other hand, if you anticipate major gaps between current and future labor needs, you may want to consider hiring additional permanent or temporary staff, substituting capital for labor, or reorganizing the business into a partnership so that labor (and equipment) can be shared.

If you’ve decided to reassign current tasks or jobs, refer to the skills assessment that you developed in Planning Task Two (Worksheet 2.7), along with each team member’s personal workload goals (Worksheet 3.3) to determine who will fill projected work force needs. Be realistic! On the other hand, if you plan to add labor, consider the range of acquisition options such as contract labor, custom operators, employees, family labor, interns and volunteers. The advantages and disadvantages of some of these alternatives are described in Figure 72. Some of these strategy alternatives may have significant tax, equity and cash flow implications.47 You will have an opportunity to evaluate workforce plans from a financial perspective later, before finalizing Contract service providers. Contract workers may be self-employed or an employee of the contract provider.

Crop harvesting is one of the most common contract services provided. If you plan to contract for services, be sure to consult your tax accountant regarding tax withholding and employer liabilities.

Custom operators. Custom operators are usually the cheapest source of temporary labor. Custom operators often are well trained and supply their own equipment.

They require no tax withholding or benefit packages. The primary advantage of custom operators is that they free up family labor and employees for other specialized tasks.

Employees. Hiring full- and part-time employees requires time (searching, hiring, training, managing) and raises new issues to deal with, including compensation, benefits packages, discipline and sometimes firing. They can make a business more profitable only if they are truly needed and are a good match.

Family labor. Farm operators and other “unpaid” family members account for two-thirds of the production workforce in agriculture. They offer the advantage of knowing your business well, but can also carry family conflict into the business.

Seasonal hired labor. Hired labor is typically used to fill seasonal workforce shortages when operators and family members are unable to supply the necessary labor. Hired labor is usually paid less than other workers or employees.

There are many laws and regulations that govern seasonal or migrant labor. 4 TASK 149 BUILDING A SUSTAINABLE BUSINESS Figure 72.

Filling Workforce Needs48 47Labor Laws and Regulations, Miller, 1997. 48Economic and Business Principles in Farm Planning and Production, James and Eberle, 2000.