--- The Minars, for instance, ---

Your values and goals, as well as target market preferences, will also affect packaging choices.

The Minars, for instance, envisioned marketing to customers “who value old- fashioned taste.” As a result, one of their distribution strategies was to package their milk in old-fashioned, returnable, glass bottles. “It is a common perception that milk in glass bottles stays colder, tastes better, is of higher quality, and has a nostalgic appeal to many customers,” they say in their business plan. By packaging in glass bottles, the Minars were also able to satisfy one of their environmental values—namely, to minimize their impact on the land through reuseable packaging.

Delivery scheduling and handling. Your distribution strategy should also take into account how often you will need to make deliveries, either to satisfy customer demand or to fill intermediary requirements. What type of delivery schedule will be necessary? If you offer a perishable product, delivery schedules will be critical. The Minars spoke with retailers to research delivery conditions, such as the handling of returnable bottles, and a delivery schedule. Moreover, if you are marketing through an intermediary, your ability to meet delivery commitments may determine their continued business. “Retail buyers rely on delivery at the promised time so they know how much may need to be supplemented to meet demand and so they can schedule workers to handle delivery and display.”26 As you develop a delivery schedule, be aware of peak production periods (if your business is seasonal) as well as industry handling requirements.

Organic producers are required, in most cases, to verify that organic grains Worksheet 4.5 Distribution and Packaging Complete this Worksheet for each major product you plan to produce. Describe how you intend to move and package this product for each target market segment. Note where and how the product will be shipped (location and scope) and what type of distribution channel you will utilize (movement). Next, based on each distribution plan, research and describe one or more packaging strategies for this product. Consider what type of packaging might be valued by customers (e.g. convenience) or even required by intermediaries and distributors. Describe a delivery and handling schedule by period (month, season, year).Then, summarize your distribution and packaging strategies for this product.

Product:

Period:

Customer Segment:

Location:

Scope:

Movement (distribution channel):

Industry packaging requirements:

Packaging ideas:

Delivery schedule & handling:

CONTINUED Bottled milk Weekly 1—Households New Prague—within 25 miles of farm.

Intensive in New Prague. We have polled our local community, for the past two years, at our local Expo, regarding their interest in home delivery. So far we have 75 names on this growing list. These will be the nucleus of our home delivery service. They are all located within 10 miles of one another.

Direct via home delivery.

Need to research.

We will explore promotional packaging with a logo design for all products. Bottled milk may be packaged in returnable glass or plastic containers.

Home delivery coolers will be available to each customer.

We plan to make weekly home deliveries to New Prague residents. Our home delivery schedule will be broken up into daily routes. We will travel approximately 25 miles/day for each home delivery route. Each delivery route is estimated to take eight hours. 4 TASK 120 BUILDING A SUSTAINABLE BUSINESS Figure 46.

Example from Cedar Summit Farm—Worksheet 4.5:  Distribution and Packaging 26New Markets for Producers: Selling to Retail Stores, Center for Integrated Agricultural Systems, 1999.