--- Example from Cedar Summit ---

Current Work Force: Who is involved in our business and what roles do they play?

The best place to start an assessment of your current human resources situation is with a straightforward listing of all the people involved in your operation and the roles they play. This sounds simple, but it can provide some eye-opening insights on how you have organized decision making and work responsibilities. A simple matrix with a column for each major enterprise or activity and a row for each individual is an effective way to structure this information.

In their Worksheet 2.8: Human Resources Matrix (Figure 16), the Minars have drafted a brief description of duties and responsibilities in the cell for each enterprise in which that individual is involved. For example, Paul Kajer has major management and labor responsibilities for the dairy enterprise. He also works closely with Dave in the pasture enterprise and with Dave and Dan in the hay enterprise. Note that the Minars have included general management as a separate enterprise. In doing so, they recognize that there are important tasks associated with managing and coordinating the entire operation. Also note that they have included the dairy technician from their Figure 16.

Example from Cedar Summit Farm—Worksheet 2.8:  Human Resources Matrix Worksheet Human Resources Matrix 2.8 Use this worksheet to identify the people involved in your operations and the roles they play.

Person Enterprise Dave Minar (FT) Florence Minar (FT) Paul Kajer (FT) Dan Minar (PT) Ryan Jirik (PT) Summer student (FT) Other Labor:

Consultants Ira Beckman, FBM Cenex Coop Technician Dairy Order feed, man- age dry cows Herd manager; milking and other labor Milking, Tuesdays and weekends Maintain milking equipment Hogs Production labor and management; marketing Marketing Feed animals Broilers/Turkey Production labor and management; marketing Marketing Feed animals Beef Production labor and management; marketing Marketing Feed animals Hay Production labor and management Production labor and management Production labor and management Hauling Pasture Production labor and management Production labor and management General Management Book-keeping and financial analysis General customer comm.

General farm labor Other farm labor Financial analysis 2 TASK 47 BUILDING A SUSTAINABLE BUSINESS