--- “Changing Market Conditions” section of Worksheet 2.2 ---

Market and Industry: How is our market changing?

Markets rarely stand still. On the supply side, new competitors might enter, while old rivals go out of business. On the demand side, the introduction of new substitute products might reduce demand for your product or new research might make it possible for you to make a health claim that helps you expand demand for your product. In the longer term, broad trends in customer and competitor demographics, technology and government policy can transform the size and structure of your market. The last step in assessing your current marketing strategies and activities is to look ahead to evaluate their potential for change.

Dave and Florence Minar observed that growing concerns over food safety and interest in more environmentally friendly farming practices should have positive impacts on the market for their meat products. They also noted that price premiums for locally produced meat products are attracting competitors.

Still, Dave and Florence believed their grass-based production system and their attention to supplying convenient products would help them sustain their competitive advantage.

Be sure to consider a wide range of potential changes to your market as you complete the “Changing Market Conditions” section of Worksheet 2.2 for each of your products. Often when we look back after experiencing a sudden, unexpected change, we realize that we could have seen it coming. Questioning even the most long-held assumptions about your markets can help you identify issues that need to be addressed as you develop a business plan for the future.

Operations Situation Before planning for the future, it’s important to step back and assess the resources available to your farm operation and the enterprises in which you use those resources. In this section the focus is on physical resources. Later, you’ll assess the human and financial resources of your business.

The assessment of physical resources and farm operations should answer the following questions: • Resources: What physical resources are available for our business? • Production: What production systems are we using? • Management: What management systems do we have in place to support our business? 2 TASK 38 BUILDING A SUSTAINABLE BUSINESS .......

The Four Key Management Areas: • Marketing ;Operations • Human Resources • Finance