--- Department of Agriculture. Cedar Summit Farm works with the Minnesota Food Association’s Community ---

Our dairy has been the main source of revenue on our farm. During the 70’s and 80’s the farm usually sold about 1 million pounds of milk annually to a wholesale outlet. Last year the farm wholesaled 2 million pounds of milk (243,000 gallons) to a cheese factory. We have implemented a cross breeding program the past five years. We hope to develop a cow that is more compatible with our new grazing management, and will produce higher component milk that will meet our future needs. The farm dairy enterprise’s return over direct expenses in 1999 was $xxx,xxx.

We currently raise 1500-2000 broilers in a free-range environment. These chickens are processed at an inspected facility and made available fresh to the public three times each summer. Frozen birds are available for sale, by appointment, until sold out. We are licensed food vendors through the Minnesota Department of Agriculture. Cedar Summit Farm works with the Minnesota Food Association’s Community Food Project. We, along with several other poultry producers in our area, provide chickens for residents of low income housing units. Fresh turkeys for Thanksgiving have been a popular fall item. We have them processed for fresh pickup the day before Thanksgiving. There are already twenty people on the waiting list for Thanksgiving 2000. The poultry enterprise’s return over direct expenses in 1999 was $x,xxx.

Our 50 hogs are raised outside in the fresh air and sunshine. This year they will be processed at a state inspected facility. They will be sold in “Quarter Packs”. A quarter pack will equal one-quarter hog.

These packs will contain fresh pork as well as ham and some sausage. The hog enterprise’s return over direct expenses in 1999 was $xx,xxx.

Our popular “Beef Gourmet Packs” are the mainstay of our (steer) beef sales. The 30-pound burger packs are also a very good seller. Most of our burger comes from low-milk producing cows. We keep about 30% of our bull calves to raise for steers, this can be increased to keep up with sales.

We started the meat business because we didn’t like supermarket chickens and thought others felt the same way. Cedar Summit Farm is located in Helena Township of Scott County, at the very southern edge of the Minneapolis-St. Paul Metro area. Our area of Helena Township is zoned for 10-acre lots. Many farms have been further subdivided into smaller lots, turning our area into a more urban-like setting. Our customers are moving in around us! Our targeted market is people who have experienced eating home- raised meat products, families with small children, and the health conscious.

Our main marketing strategy has been to publish a brochure every March, which includes order cards for all our products. Our daughter Lisa helps us, and we mailed 450 brochures this year to our customers of the past three years. We use newspaper ads, attend food and community expos, are licensed “Minnesota Grown” producers, and are listed in all of their publications. We have found that word of mouth is our best advertising. One marketing strategy that didn’t work was putting signs in the metro area, as it netted us nothing.

Our marketing emphasis has been the production and sale of non-confined, grass-fed meat products, produced without the use of hormones or antibiotics. We prefer that our customers come to the farm to pick up their meat products. Our brochure states; “Many consumers are generations removed from farming and have no clear idea where their food is grown. You can be an important link in the effort to create a food system in which consumers have a real connection to the farm. Every one has their own doctor, dentist and banker. The Minars at Cedar Summit Farm want to be your farmer.” Appendices 268 BUILDING A SUSTAINABLE BUSINESS