--- Develop an Implementation “To-do” List. ---

Implementation and Monitoring The success of your whole farm business strategy will be, to a large extent, dependent on timely and efficient implementation. This is sometimes the hardest part for many people who worry that they haven’t done enough research or that their strategy won’t go as planned. In fact, it probably won’t. Most plans don’t realize them selves perfectly; there are always uncertainties, like those discussed when you were developing your contingency plan. But there comes a time when you must, as the well-known marketing slogan goes, just do it!

After implementation, monitor your plan. Monitoring involves tracking how your farm or business is progressing and taking action where necessary to make sure that it is on course to meet your goals. It means, as Allan Savory notes, “looking for deviations from the plan for the purpose of correcting them.”75 For instance, if you drew a map for Worksheet 4.2 to estimate direct market sales potential, try plotting the zip codes from your customers’ checks to see just how far your customers travel to purchase your product. What does this tell you? Is your marketing strategy effective? Are you reaching your target market?

Are there households within 20 miles of your business that aren’t customers but who should be? You’ll also want to ask yourself how does your work, accomplishments, output, etc., compare with desired goals and projections.

In order to track your progress, you should develop an implementation “to- do” list, establish checkpoints, keep records, and review progress with planning team members, board members, or management staff.

Develop an Implementation “To-do” List.

Describe how your strategy will be implemented, indicate who will be responsible for completing implementation tasks, and specify deadlines for completing each task. In other words, create a “to-do” list for strategy implementation. This will help you stay on course as you begin implementing your whole-farm strategy.

A portion of the to-do list created by Dave and Florence Minar for their proposed processing business is presented in Figure 102. The first item on their to-do list, of course, is to contact lenders and secure financing for the new business strategy. Once financing was available at interest rates that allowed adequate repayment and profit, the Minars were ready to quickly move down their list and begin readying the business for its first day of milk processing. 5 TASK 238 BUILDING A SUSTAINABLE BUSINESS Figure 101.

The Minar family began processing their first batch of milk in March, 2002 Gigi DiGiacomo 75Holistic Management, A New Framework for Decision Making, 2nd Ed., Savory and Butterfield, 1999.