--- Planning Task Four: ---

Agencies, Organizations and Networks
Agricultural Mediation Program. Offers confidential
mediation services in each state to assist with conflict
resolution among family and business partners over goals
and other issues. Conducted by the USDA’s Farm Service
Agency.
Holistic Management International. Provides resources
and consultation to assist farmers and other individuals
with a goals-based decision-making process that can be
applied to personal and business planning.
Planning Task Four:
Strategic Planning
Publications, Software, Videos and
Websites
Agricultural Prices—Annual. National Agricultural
Statistics Service.
Developing a Longer-Range Strategic Farm Business
Plan. Part One of a planned six part series: Business
Management for Farmers. Ken Thomas. Midwest Plan
Services, Iowa State University, Ames, IA. 1999.
Publication number: NCR-610A.
Evaluating a Rural Enterprise. Preston Sullivan and
Lane Greer. ATTRA - National Sustainable Agriculture
Information Service. 2002.
The Executive Summary. In Business Owners’ Toolkit
online. CCH Incorporated. 2002.

Farming Alternatives: A Guide to Evaluating the
Feasibility of New Farm-Based Enterprises. Nancy
Grudens Schuck, Wayne Knoblauch, Judy Green and Mary
Saylor. Natural Resource, Agriculture, and Engineering
Service, Cornell University. 1988. Publication number:
NRAES-32.
Growing Your Range Poultry Business: An
Entrepreneur’s Toolbox. Anne Fanatico and David
Redhage. ATTRA - National Sustainable Agriculture
Information Service. October 2002.
In the Eyes of the Law: Legal Issues Associated with
Direct Farm Marketing. Richard F. Prim and Kaarin K.
Foede. University of Minnesota Extension Service. 2002.
Product number: BU-07683.
Planning for Contingencies. In Business Owners’ Toolkit
online. CCH Incorporated. 2002.

Primer for Selecting New Enterprises for Your Farm.
Tim Woods and Steve Isaacs. Agricultural Economics,
University of Kentucky. 2000. Publication number: 00-13.

Planning Task Two:
History, Current Situation
Publications, Software, Videos and
Websites
Developing a Balance Sheet. Ross O. Love, Harry G.
Haefner, and Damona G. Doye. Oklahoma Cooperative
Extension Service. 1998. Publication number: F-752.
Developing an Income Statement. Lori J. Shipman
and Damona G. Doye. Oklahoma Cooperative Extension
Service. 1998. Publication number: F-753.
Evaluating Financial Performance and Position.
Harry P. Mapp and Ross O. Love. Oklahoma Cooperative
Extension Service. 1998. Publication number: F-790.
FINPACK Software. Center for Farm Financial
Management.
The Monitoring Tool Box. Julia Ahlers Ness (editor).
Land Stewardship Project and the Minnesota Institute for
Sustainable Agriculture. 1998.
Agencies, Organizations and Networks
Center for Farm Financial Management. Develops
educational software and training programs for farmers,
agricultural lenders, and educators that apply the
principles and concepts of farm planning, financing, and
analysis in a practical manner.
United States Department of Agriculture Natural
Resources Conservation Service.
Planning Task Three:
Vision, Goals, Mission
Publications, Software, Videos and
Websites
Goal Setting for Farm and Ranch Families. Damona
Doye. Oklahoma Cooperative Service Extension Service.
2001. Fact sheet number: WF-244.
Holistic Management: A New Framework for Decision
Making. Allan Savory and Jody Butterfield. Island Press.
2nd Edition. 1999.
Whole Farm Planning: Combining Family, Profit
and Environment. David Mulla, Les Everett, and
Gigi DiGiacomo. Minnesota Institute for Sustainable
Agriculture, 1998.
Whole Farm Planning at Work: Success Stories of
Ten Farms. Jill MacKenzie and Loni Kemp. Minnesota
Project.1999.
Resources
250
BUILDING A SUSTAINABLE BUSINESS