--- Assess Your Current Situation ---

Assess Your Current Situation The current circumstances surrounding your life and business can create unique opportunities as well as obstacles. This section guides you through a description of your current situation for each of four business management functions: marketing, operations, human resources and finances. This is a chance to inventory your resources and assess how well you are using them.

In each management area, you’ll collect facts and figures that will help you evaluate your operation in terms of Strengths, Weaknesses, Opportunities and Threats (SWOT). The SWOT analysis is a planning tool used by businesses and organizations of all sizes and types. Strengths and weaknesses refer to factors that are internal to your business. Opportunities and threats refer to your business’ external environment. Ultimately, your plans for the future should help you build on your strengths and overcome your weaknesses. Your plan should help you take advantage of opportunities or ward off threats offered by your environment. Keep a running list of strengths, weaknesses, opportunities and threats in each management area as you work through the text and Worksheets in this section. Finally, you’ll summarize that information and make an overall SWOT analysis for your business that you can include in your final business plan.

Involve members of your planning team and other business stakeholders in this process. Assessing your current situation from several points of view can help you gain perspective on the issues and alternatives that your business plan will address.

Marketing Situation When you ask another farmer to describe his or her operation, the response will usually begin with information on the number of acres farmed, the type of crops grown, and livestock raised. This made sense for the “old agriculture” when focus was on selling undifferentiated commodities to anonymous buyers. More and more, we are moving toward a “new agriculture” where farmers sell differentiated products and are in direct contact with their customers.

You can begin with any of the four management areas as you develop a description of your operation, but we encourage you to consider starting with an assessment of the markets you serve and your strategies for serving them. These are the key questions you’ll need to answer: • Product: What is our product? • Customers: What markets do we serve? • Unique Features: What are the unique features that distinguish our products? • Distribution: How do we distribute our products? 2 TASK 30 BUILDING A SUSTAINABLE BUSINESS Evaluate Your Current Situation for:

S =Strengths W=Weaknesses O=Opportunities T =Threats ......

The Four Key Management Areas: ;Marketing • Operations • Human Resources • Finance