--- Frank Foltz of Northwind ---

goals for the community and environment with marketing, human resources and finance goals for the business. All of these goals, however, were broken out into short, intermediate and long-term timeframes.

Long-time business owner, Frank Foltz of Northwind Nursery and Orchards, outlined the following short and long-term goals for his business: “Our immediate, short- term goal is to make a smooth transition from our current two- pronged (mail order and local) marketing approach to marketing entirely in our local community.

While the mail order business has been profitable and offers much more opportunity for expansion, we feel the “local only” sales approach fits more with the values and mission of our business. . . .

Therefore, we would like to sell the mail order portion of our business to a like-minded individual or family and begin a process of transition. This will eliminate a portion of our income and a portion of our workload. . . . The lighter workload will enable us to initiate our next goal of a community-oriented nursery fruit farm and sustainable agriculture research facility where customers (community members) come to purchase products, learn how to grow their own fruit, and ‘experience’ a working farm. A long-term goal is to help other interested families establish their own small-scale, sustainable, agricultural enterprises, thus encouraging the restoration of the family farm and the revitalization of our rural communities.” Frank’s task of creating specific goals was made easier by the fact that he has owned and operated his business for seventeen years. However, if you are just starting out or considering an entirely new business venture, your goals Worksheet 3.4 Have each member of your planning team draft personal goals as well as one or more shortterm and longterm goals for each functional management area of your business.

Identifying Our Family Business Goals Short-term Goals (1-5 years) Intermediate Goals (5-10 years) Long-term Goals (10 Years +) —Process products on the farm. —Market a wide range of high quality, differentiated dairy and meat products. —Improve the landscape and local environment. —Provide at least three full-time jobs for our two sons and daughter. —Generate enough profit from the business in year one to cover expenses, including all of our children’s salaries. —Support the local community. —Reduce year-to-year income fluctuations (reliance on commodity prices). —Reduce debt. —Provide employment for any family member who desires to work in the business. —Transfer the farm business to our children. —Begin drawing retirement income from the business. —Create franchise opportunities for other farmers. 3 TASK 93 BUILDING A SUSTAINABLE BUSINESS Figure 34.

Example from Cedar Summit Farm—Worksheet 3.4:  Identifying Our Family Business Goals