--- A Brief History of Our Farm Operation ---

operation have grown. They have made important choices that have shaped their current situation and the strategies they are considering for the future. These include the decision to stop using pesticides in 1974, the shift to grazing in 1993, and the addition of a direct marketing meat business in 1994. This history clarifies the context for the Minars’ desire to add on-farm milk processing and direct marketing of dairy products to their farm business.

Worksheet A Brief History of Our Farm Operation 2.1 Write a brief history describing the important events and decisions in your life and operation.Why did you make the choices you did? What have been the most important outcomes resulting from the interaction of your own choices and external circumstances? What key lessons have you learned? Include planning team members in this review. Use whatever time frame (one, five, ten years) best describes why and how you’ve arrived at your current business situation.

My Grandfather purchased what is now Cedar Summit Farm in 1935. When my parents married in 1938, they moved onto the farm. I was born and raised there. Florence and I met at the University of Minnesota where we were both students. I graduated in 1963 with a BS in Ag. Econ. & Dairy Science, and in 1964 we were mar- ried. I farmed with my father after service in the US Army and in 1966 accepted a position with Minn. Valley Breeders as an A. I. technician. Our family grew fast-Lisa was born in 1965, Chris in 1966 and Mike in 1967.

In 1969 we made the decision to return to the farm full time. Having been raised there, I knew what we were getting into. I was the only son and felt an obligation to return to what my Grandfather started. We built a new sixty-cow tie stall barn in 1971. Over the years we developed a registered Holstein herd that had received state and national recognition. We showed our animals at many shows and fairs.

The farm was originally 120 acres. We purchased an additional 80 acres in 1972, and another 18 acres more recently. We lease an additional 65 acres that adjoin our property. We also own a 160-acre farm at McGrath, MN that consists of 90 acres of improved pasture for young stock. In 1974 we discontinued the use of pesticides, and started exploring alternative ways to combat pests. We knew it could be done, because it had been done in the past.

In 1977, we started our second family when Laura was born. Dan was to follow in 1980. In this time period more changes were made in our family. My father, who was my main source of help, died in 1979. Chris and Mike, who were 13 and 12, were now my main source of labor. We managed to get the work done with the help of Dan Kajer, a part-time helper, and still allow them time for sports and 4-H. In the mid-80’s the older children graduated from high school and went to college. In 1986, our Dan was starting school and Florence found a full time job in town. We hired Paul Kajer, Dan Kajer’s younger brother who was still in school, to help.

Paul stayed with us until 1991, when he left to start farming on his own. Laura and our Dan were old enough to help now, and we also hired John Nelson full time.

By the late 1980’s, we began to realize that we weren’t making the progress that we should be making, and started asking ourselves some serious questions. Our debt load had remained static through the years because of equipment replacement costs and herd turnover. We were intrigued with the idea of improving animal health by allowing them to harvest their own feed for 7 months of the year. The idea, which we found exciting, was that all of our land, some of which adjoins Sand Creek, would be in permanent pasture grasses and thus would stop erosion. This would also improve the water and mineral cycles. We could see how it would improve our quality of life with less feed to harvest. We sold our milking herd and bred heifers in 1993 and started grazing with our young stock. This sale allowed us to pay off almost all of our loans. In 1994, we built a new milking parlor and started milking again.

Paul Kajer joined our operation again in 1997 and brought with him the nucleus of his herd. Paul is paid a percentage of the gross check with a bonus at the end of the year. He retains ownership of the growth of his herd.

We were told when we started grazing that there was a 7-year learning curve. This seems to be true, because after a few years of struggling, in 1999 we were able to significantly reduce our debt load.

In 1994 we started a direct marketing retail meat business with pasture-raised chicken. We had some underutilized areas where we could raise chickens and the chickens we had been buying in the grocery store were becoming less and less appealing. We knew others felt the same way. We hired a marketing consultant to help us with a brochure and we raised 900 chickens. Our chickens sold out and we were on our way. This ven- ture has evolved into a significant sideline. In 1998 Florence quit her job to help more at home. Over the past 5 years we have also included turkeys, hogs and steers.

It is a good feeling to be able to supply our community with high quality food and hope we can continue to do so in the future.

BUILDING A SUSTAINABLE BUSINESS 29 2 TASK Figure 5.

Example from Cedar Summit Farm— Worksheet 2.1:  A Brief History of Our Farm Operation