--- Develop a Strategic Operations Plan ---

milk per month. The Pladot Mini- Dairy equipment can process between 148,333—207,667 pounds of milk per month.

Should market demand increase for their products, the Minars could increase their herd (and output) to 187 cows and process at the plant’s full capacity. They have the acreage to support more cows. However, this would necessitate converting some of their hay fields to pasture or acquiring access to additional land resources. These are issues that the Minars will need to evaluate in their contingency plan should future opportunities arise.

Use Worksheet 4.16:

Estimating Output and Capacity to estimate production/output potential and begin shaping a size-related strategy for the business. If appropriate, describe your growth or contraction strategy for the whole farm and for each future enterprise.

Develop a Strategic Operations Plan You’re ready to develop a whole farm operations plan! Use Worksheet 4.17: Operations Strategy Summary to briefly describe the management system you intend to implement for each enterprise. Detail crop rotations, pasture layout and rotation, milking schedules, etc. Think about how these might change throughout your start-up or transition period. Next, list new resource needs and your strategy for acquiring them. Then record all operating expenses associated with each enterprise or the whole farm (if appropriate). Finally, you’re ready to pull your enterprise-specific operations strategies together into one, whole-farm production and operations strategy.

Worksheet 4.16 Complete this worksheet for each major enterprise and during each year in your business plan (long run and transition period). Begin by recording historic yield or production estimates from your farm or from available data (e.g., if this is a new enterprise for your farm) in the “Typical Output” rows. Next, record expected output (based on published research, conversations with other farmers, etc.). Finally, add in your best- and worst-case scenario production estimates in the “high output” and “low output” rows, respectively. Conclude by noting any production capacity limits (based on equipment, land, labor) throughout the transition and long term. These estimates will help you estimate profitability and explore risks as you further develop strategies for expanding, maintaining or contracting the business. For more information and examples, review pages 143-144.

Estimating Output and Capacity Enterprise:

Long Run Transition Period (Expected) Year 1 Year 2 Year 3 Typical output Expected output High output Low output Production capacity At the whole-farm level, we plan to (grow/maintain/contract) our business: 207,666 pounds milk/month (43,536 half-gallon bottles) We will not grow the herd beyond the maximum carrying capacity of our current land holdings. We will grow the processing portion of our business gradually from 50,075 pounds of milk/month in November 2001 to 166,916 pounds per month by May 2004. Approximately 40 percent of all raw milk will be processed as skim, two-percent, and whole bottled milk (flavored and unflavored).

Bottled milk 166,916 pounds milk/month (34,993 half-gallon bottles) 110,000 pounds milk/month 166,916 pounds milk/month 50,075 pounds milk/month Enterprise:

Long Run Transition Period (Expected) Year 1 Year 2 Year 3 Typical output Expected output High output Low output Production capacity 4 TASK 144 BUILDING A SUSTAINABLE BUSINESS Figure 68.

Example from Cedar Summit Farm—Worksheet 4.16:  Estimating Output and Capacity