--- Publications, Software, Videos and ---

of sustainable agriculture events, and announcements, a searchable database of resources, and links to many related sites and resources.

National Organic Program, USDA. Provides information, contacts, and forms for organic certification in each state.

National Sustainable Agriculture Information Service (ATTRA). A national sustainable farming information center that provides technical assistance information free of charge to farmers and farm support groups. They have many excellent up-to-date publications on alternative crops, livestock, and sustainable farming practices. Check their listing of available publications online, or for more information.

Sustainable Agriculture Research and Education (SARE). SARE is a national grants and outreach program working to advance sustainable innovation to the whole of American agriculture. SARE works primarily through competitive grants, which are offered through four regions under the direction of councils that include farmers and ranchers along with representatives from universities, government, agribusiness and the nonprofit sector. SARE’s Professional Development Program offers learning opportunities to a variety of agricultural extension and other field agency personnel. The SARE Outreach office publishes practical, how-to books, bulletins and online resources for farmers, ranchers and educators. SARE is part of USDA’s National Institute of Food and Agriculture (NIFA).

Sustainable Farming Association of Minnesota, regional chapters throughout Minnesota. The Sustainable Farming Association of Minnesota (SFA) provides a support network for farmers and networks with other organizations and agencies. The SFA facilitates educational opportunities for both members and the public about economically and environmentally sound agriculture practices. Each chapter plans and organizes various field days and workshops.

Functional Areas:

Human Resources Publications, Software, Videos and Websites Acquiring and Managing Resources for the Farm Business. Part four of a six-part series: Business Management for Farmers. Kenneth Thomas. MidWest Plan Service, Ames, IA. 2001. Contact MidWest Plan Service, 122 Davidson Hall, Iowa State University, Ames, IA.

Checking Your Farm Business Management Skills.

Michael Boehlje, Craig Dobbins, Alan Miller, Janet Bechman, Aadron Rausch. Purdue University Cooperative Extension. 2000. Publication number: ID-237.

Service. 1999.

Upper Midwest Organic Resource Directory. Midwest Organic and Sustainable Education Services (MOSES). 3rd edition, 2001.

Agencies, Organizations and Networks Alternative Farming Systems Information Center (AFSIC), National Agricultural Library, USDA.

Information center specializing in the location, collection, and provision of information about sustainable and alternative agricultural systems.

Center for Rural Affairs, Beginning Farmer Sustainable Agriculture Project. A nonprofit farm advocacy and support information provider. The Beginning Farmer Sustainable Agriculture Project exposes beginning farmers to low-input, low capital, alternative, and knowledge-based farming systems that are environmentally sustainable. The Center has numerous publications and information about sustainable agriculture.

Energy and Sustainable Agriculture Program (ESAP), Minnesota Department of Agriculture. ESAP’s purpose is to demonstrate and promote alternative agricultural practices that are energy efficient, environmentally sound, and enhance the self-sufficiency of Minnesota farmers. ESAP sponsors a loan program, demonstration grant program, on-farm research, workshops, and speakers.

Farm Beginnings Program (Minnesota). Production and finance-related business training for beginning farmers offered by the Land Stewardship Project (LSP) with support from the Minnesota Extension Service.

Know Your Farmer, Know Your Food. This USDA initiative includes a collection of available government resources for strengthening local and regional food systems. The website has information on grants, loans and other financial support, and available tools and resources.

Land Stewardship Project. A nonprofit that fosters an ethic of stewardship for farmland, and promotes sustainable agriculture and sustainable communities.

Minnesota Institute for Sustainable Agriculture (MISA). A partnership between the College of Food, Agricultural and Natural Resource Sciences and the University of Extension at the University of Minnesota, and the Sustainers’ Coalition (a group of community nonprofit organizations, which includes the Institute for Agricultural and Trade Policy, the Land Stewardship Project, the Minnesota Food Association, the Minnesota Project, and the Minnesota Sustainable Farming Association). MISA operates a website with current sustainable agriculture information, including a calendar Resources 253 BUILDING A SUSTAINABLE BUSINESS