--- Differentiated Product Pricing Strategies ---

One common product pricing approach, skim pricing, is to establish a relatively high market entry price to recover costs before lowering the price to expand the customer base.

This practice, however, can attract more competition if your prices remain too high for too long. The alternative is penetration pricing.

Similar to promotional pricing, you initially set a product price below your intended long-term price to secure market acceptance of your product. The advantage of penetration pricing is that it will not attract competition. When selecting a pricing strategy for differentiated commo dities, products or services, take a peek at the options listed in Figure 48.

Competitive pricing. Competitive pricing strategies are common among large manufacturers and are aimed at undermining competition. Predatory pricing, where a company sets its price below cost to force its competitors out of the market, is a typical competitive pricing strategy. Although these strategies may work well for large commercial companies, they are not recommended for small-scale, independent businesses. Price wars are not easily won. That said, the food industry is considered a “mature” marketplace and your ability to compete on the basis of price may be very important.29 There are several well-capitalized players, even in the organic market, offering similar services.

Cost-oriented pricing. The cost-oriented pricing strategy is probably the most straightforward. Based on your production costs, you and your planning team make a subjective decision about whether to price your product at 10 percent, 50 percent, or 100 percent above current costs. Of course, you will need to conduct marketing research to determine whether or not your customers are willing to pay the cost-plus price that you have established.

Flexible or variable pricing. Flexible pricing strategies involve setting a range of prices for your product. Flexible pricing is common when individual bargaining takes place. The prices that you set may vary according to the individual buyer, time of year, or time of day. For instance, farmers who sell perishable fruits, vegetables and herbs at farmers’ markets often establish one price for their products in early morning and by day-end are willing to lower their prices to move any excess product.

Penetration or promotional pricing. A penetration pricing strategy involves initially setting your product price below your intended long-term price to help penetrate the market. The advantage of penetration pricing is that it will not attract competition. Before pursuing a penetration pricing strategy, you should thoroughly research prevailing market prices and crunch some numbers to determine just how long you can sustain a below-cost penetration price. Penetration or promotional pricing usually takes place at the retail level when marketing direct to your product’s final consumers.

Product line pricing. If you plan to market a line of products, you might consider a product line pricing strategy where a limited range of prices is established for all of the products that you will offer. For instance, if you envision marketing to low-income customers, then your price line or price range must be based on “affordability.” In this case, you might establish an upper limit or ceiling for prices so that your price line is bounded by your production costs on one end and an affordable ceiling on the other end.

Relative pricing. Relative pricing strategies involve setting your price above, below or at the prevailing market price. Clearly, this strategy requires that you research the prevailing market price for your product.

Skimming or skim pricing. The price skimming strategy is based on the idea that you can set a high market entry price to recover costs quickly (to “skim the cream off the top”) before lowering your price to what you intend as the long-term price. This pricing strategy is possible only when you have few or no competitors. The primary disadvantage of the skimming strategy is that it attracts competition. Once competitors enter the market, you may be forced to match their lower prices.

Contract pricing for specialty commodities. Contracts for specialty commodities vary dramatically in terms of the price paid, payment conditions, grower responsibilities, storage and shipping arrangements. The advantage of pricing on contract is that you know in advance what price will be paid for the commodity. Be aware, however, that when producing a specialty variety crop or when employing a new production management system, your yield and output risk increases as does your exposure to quality discounts.

Use a contract checklist if you are considering this method of pricing for specialty crops or livestock.30 Figure 48.

Differentiated Product Pricing Strategies28 4 TASK 123 BUILDING A SUSTAINABLE BUSINESS 28 Marketing, Kurtz and Boone, 1981. 29Cooperative Grocer, Natural/Organic Industry Outlook, Southworth, September- October 2001. 30Contract Evaluation, University of Illinois, 2001 (reviewed).