--- Page 271 ---

grain-fed cows. These two fatty acids fight cancer, promote lean muscle mass in humans, and have many other health benefits. In the Minneapolis-St. Paul Metro area, 10 percent equates to 200,000 potential customers. Many customers come to our farm and tell us they are so glad that we are here; we get many new customers each year by word of mouth. There is enthusiasm for consumer to producer relationships; people are passionate to know where their food comes from. In order to bring families to our farm we have an open house in the spring; we are looking at having a tour each fall.

Our target market is upper middle class families with young children, people who have experienced eating home-raised meat products, the health conscious, and fine restaurants. We will be marketing a wide range of high-quality dairy products, priced between organic and supermarket prices.

These will be distributed in a small, used, repainted refrigerated van. We will continue the use of professional looking promotional material to add credibility to our endeavor. A customer marketing brochure detailing our prices and products will be ready by Sept.1, 2000 when we are ready to start our home delivery canvassing.

Distribution Along with our retail center and drive-up, we will establish home delivery routes, drop off sites at churches, co-op food stores and restaurants. These will be established before production begins. Other distribution places will be farmers’ markets.

Our retail center will be attached to the production facility with a glassed area to view processing. It will be open according to customer demand. There will also be an outside cooler for customers to access before and after hours, operated on the honor system. We will have a drive-up window so parents won’t have to leave their car to buy milk and other products.

We will canvas neighborhoods before production begins to establish economically feasible delivery routes. We will begin with New Prague and surrounding area. People that show an interest outside our 25-mile radius will be asked to find drop sites at churches and other locations that have facilities for cold and frozen foods.

Upper end restaurants have shown interest in local and sustainably produced food. These businesses use large amounts of cream and butter. Co-op food stores have also shown an interest in our products.

Products Fluid milk will be sold in gallons and half gallons as skim, 1%, 2%,and whole milk. Cream will be sold in pints, butter in 1-pound solid blocks and buttermilk in quarts. In the future we plan to make ice cream, yogurt and soft cheeses. We will have hard cheeses made for us from our milk until we can learn the art.

Meat products that we sell now will be available also.

Appendices 270 BUILDING A SUSTAINABLE BUSINESS