--- Cedar Summit Farm is managed as a partnership between Dave & Florence Minar and Paul Kajer. ---

In 1974 we discontinued the use of pesticides, and started exploring alternative ways to combat pests. We knew it could be done, because it had been done in the past.

In 1977 we started our second family when Laura was born. Dan was to follow in 1980. In this time period more changes were made in our family. My father, who was my main source of help, died in 1979.

Chris and Mike, who were 13 and 12, were now my main source of labor. We managed to get the work done with the help of Dan Kajer, a part-time helper, and still allow them time for sports and 4-H. In the mid-80’s the older children graduated from high school and went to college. In 1986, our Dan was starting school and Florence found a full-time job in town. We hired Paul Kajer, Dan Kajer’s younger brother who was still in school, to help. Paul stayed with us until 1991, when he left to start farming on his own. Laura and our Dan were old enough to help now, and we also hired John Nelson full-time.

By the late 1980’s, we began to realize that we weren’t making the progress that we should be making, and started asking ourselves some serious questions. Our debt load had remained static through the years because of equipment replacement costs and herd turnover. We were intrigued with the idea of improving animal health by allowing them to harvest their own feed for 7 months of the year. The idea, which we found exciting, was that all of our land, some of which adjoins Sand Creek, would be in permanent pasture grasses and thus would stop erosion. This would also improve the water and mineral cycles. We could see how it would improve our quality of life with less feed to harvest. We sold our milking herd and bred heifers in 1993, and started grazing with our young stock. This sale allowed us to pay off almost all of our loans. In 1994, we built a new milking parlor and started milking again.

Paul Kajer joined our operation again in 1997 and brought with him the nucleus of his herd. Paul is paid a percentage of the gross check with a bonus at the end of the year. He retains ownership of his herd and its growth.

We were told when we started grazing that there was a 7- year learning curve. This seems to be true, because after a few years of struggling, we were able to significantly reduce our debt load in 1999.

In 1994 we started a direct marketing retail meat business with pasture-raised chicken. We had some underutilized areas where we could raise chickens and the chickens we had been buying in the grocery store were becoming less and less appealing. We knew others felt the same way. We hired a marketing consultant to help us with a brochure and we raised 900 chickens. Our chickens sold out and we were on our way. This venture has evolved into a significant sideline. In 1998 Florence quit her job to help more at home. Over the past 5 years we have also included turkeys, hogs and steers.

It is a good feeling to be able to supply our community with high quality food and hope we can continue to do so in the future.

Current Situation Cedar Summit Farm is managed as a partnership between Dave & Florence Minar and Paul Kajer.

Paul is our herd manager and provides most of the labor for the dairy. Our son, Dan, relieves him on every other weekend and one night during the week. Dan is also going to college, studying marketing and business management. Josh, a high school student, also helps Paul milk on weekends. Dave needs to scale back his work in the dairy and devote more time to managing and marketing our direct market venture.

Appendices 267 BUILDING A SUSTAINABLE BUSINESS