--- Develop a Mission Statement ---

Develop a Mission Statement A mission statement rolls your values, current situation and vision into a set of guiding principles that describe your business. It serves as a benchmark for you and your partners while communicating how and why your business exists to customers and other community members outside your business. It is, what Holistic Management author Allan Savory calls a “statement of purpose.” 6 Your mission statement may include values and beliefs as well as a product, market, management and income description. Moreover, it should draw from your future vision by including an overview of the direction in which your business is headed.

It should be general and short, like the mission statement prepared for Riverbend Farm by owner Greg Reynolds: “The mission of this farming enterprise is to produce organic food that: is sold to local customers at a fair price; will provide us with enough income; will improve the soil, air and water quality on our farm; and is a vehicle to raise community awareness of sustainability and environmental issues.” Consider who will see your mission statement and bear this in mind as you write. For example, will you post your mission statement somewhere visible for customers to read like a label or brochure? What would you Worksheet 3.2 Use the questions below to begin sketching a brief mission statement that communicates your values, management philos ophy, and future vision. Remember to have each one of your planning team members complete this Worksheet.Then share your statements, discuss your similarities and differences, and draft a final mission statement. Going through this process as a team will generate more ideas and will result in a common mission statement that every one of your planning team members support.Try to limit your response to each of the questions so that, once combined, your mission statement does not exceed five to six sentences. Remember, write in the present tense and keep it positive.

Creating My Business Mission Statement I would like our business to be known for the following in the future:

The internal and external purpose of my business is to:

Our business mission statement will communicate to:

Based on your answers above, write internal and external mission statements that communicate your business’ purpose and the qualities for which you would like your business to be known:

Internal mission:

External mission:

Nutritious, fresh, clean food.

Provide our children with jobs in agribusiness, finance our retirement, and keep agribusiness alive in our community.

Our mission statement will be posted at our farm stand and in our processing facility. It will also be printed on our labels and in all of our brochures.

Our mission is to create a successful, fulfilling business that can support our children and ourselves financially while preserving the land and community around us.

Our mission is to provide fresh, wholesome meat and dairy products to our growing community; to become the neighborhood farm. 3 TASK 90 BUILDING A SUSTAINABLE BUSINESS Figure 33.

Example from Cedar Summit Farm—Worksheet 3.2:  Creating My Business Mission Statement 6 Holistic Management: A New Framework for Decision Making, 2nd Ed., Savory and Butterfield, 1999.