--- Business Mission Statement ---

Message. Advertising messages can be fun, serious, or factual. They can describe busi ness values, the product itself, production practices, prices, or the volume available for sale.

If you intend to use a product promotion strategy, your message can describe the unique characteristics of your product or a special offer.

On the other hand, if your strategy is centered on image promotion, your message should paint a clear picture of what you want your business to be known for among customers. Return to your Business Mission Statement (Worksheet 3.2), in which you first answered this question; it is a good place to start formulating your promotional message. Either way, if you plan to produce a retail product, try to keep your messages short so that it can be incorporated into product packaging.

Take a look at the following image and product-related messages advertised by several well-known Midwest retail food suppliers: “Our organic products are not only good for the earth, but for you and your family too! Together we can change the world—one organic acre at a time” —Horizon Organic “Bob’s Red Mill is dedicated to the manufacturing of natural foods in the natural way . . . We stone grind all common and most uncommon grains into flours and meals on our one-hundred-year-old mills . . . Our product line of natural whole grain foods [is]the most complete in the industry” —Bob’s Red Mill Worksheet 4.7 Complete this Worksheet for each major product you plan to produce. Choose an advertising approach (product, image, total) for each customer segment.Then use your information about customer needs and preferences (Worksheet 4.1) to develop a promotional message for this product. Next, think about what advertising tools and delivery methods you can use to communicate your message. Describe how often you intend to promote your product and communicate with customers (timing and frequency). It may be helpful to use a calendar or blank sheet of paper to map out an advertising plan that corresponds with slow demand periods or peak product availability. Finally, summarize your promotion strategy for this product.

Promotion Product:

Customer Segment: 1 2 3 Approach (product, image, total):

Message:

Tools:

Delivery:

Timing/frequency:

Promotion strategy:

Bottled Milk Home Delivery Total approach “The way milk used to taste” Newspaper ads, flyers, press releases Food shows, local radio, word-of-mouth Press release at ground breaking, plant opening and prior to open-house.

Holiday flyers will be sent out at Christmas.

Retail Intermediaries Total approach and prod- uct advertising Same as home delivery Tasting/samples, ads in co-op MIX magazine, MN Grown Directory In supermarket, coopera- tives, and Internet Samples will be offered quarterly. Ad costs will determine the timing and frequency of placement.

We will continue to promote our products via word-of-mouth, newspapers, brochures, MN Grown Directory, radio and sampling- these have all been successful outlets for us in the past with our meat products. In addition to these standard advertising practices, we expect to gain considerable recognition through press releases for new products since we will be the first on-farm milk processor in our area and an asset to the community. Our business and products will also be recognized and promoted by our Chamber of Commerce. 4 TASK 128 BUILDING A SUSTAINABLE BUSINESS Figure 53.

Example from Cedar Summit Farm—Worksheet 4.7:  Promotion .......