--- One: Identify Values ---

Regardless of whether you are a beginning
entrepreneur who has recently inherited a business, an
experienced farmer who is considering on-farm processing,
or a retiring business owner who is looking to pass on
the farm, business planning is important. It is an ongoing
process that begins with the identification of values and
ends with a strategic plan to address critical management
functions.
Like many rural entrepreneurs, you may have a strong
sense of the values that drew you to the land or inspired
you to begin a business. You may also have a clear set of
personal and business goals that you would like to pursue
“when the time is right.” But, if you’re like most farmers
and rural business owners, you run into problems when
trying to incorporate values and goals into day-to-day
business decisions. How can you build a balanced and
sustainable business—one that reflects your values and is
successful—in the long run?
Unlike most other business planning tools, Building
a Sustainable Business: A Planning Guide for Farmers and
Rural Business Owners takes a whole-farm approach.
You will consider traditional business planning and
marketing principles as well as your personal, economic,
environmental and community values—those less tangible
things that are a part of your thoughts every day, but which
often don’t become a planned part of your business. You
will be asked to integrate values with business management
practices throughout this Guide.
11
BUILDING A SUSTAINABLE BUSINESS
INTRODUCTION
“Business planning is a critical component to
any operation. Even though a ‘seat-of-the-pants’
approach to farming might work, it takes too
long to figure out if a decision is a poor one; you
can waste years doing the wrong thing when you
could have been doing the right thing.”
—Greg Reynolds, Riverbend Farm owner/operator.
Planning Tasks
n One: Identify Values

What’s Important to You?
n Two: Review History and Take Stock
of Your Current Situation

What Have You Got?
n Three: Clarify Your Vision, Develop
a Mission Statement and Identify
Goals

Where Do You Want to Go?
n Four: Strategic Planning and
Evaluation

What Routes Can You Take to Get
Where You Want to Go?
n Five: Present, Implement and
Monitor Your Business Plan

Which Route Will You Take and
How Will You Check Your Progress
Along the Way?