--- Human Resources Situation ---

What management and management information systems do we have in place to support our farm operations?

The knowledge embodied in sound management practices and the information contained in good production records are also important resources for your farm operation. At the enterprise level, regular review of production records can help you spot problems before they become serious—helping you control costs and boost production. For example, the Minars regularly review milk quantity and quality reports from their local dairy cooperative to monitor their dairy enterprise. Through participation in a local Dairy Herd Improvement Association, they get more detailed information on each cow’s production. At the whole farm level, familiarity with annual planning and analysis can be an invaluable asset for an operation that is poised for making a major change.

Regular meetings and discussions involving everyone in the operation are also valuable. The Minars have experience with using FINPACK3 for financial analysis and planning, and they have developed a habit of maintaining good communication among family members and their partner Paul Kajer. These skills—essential for dealing with the unexpected events that are sure to come with a significant business expansion—would be difficult to develop on an “as needed” basis.

Human Resources Situation People are an essential resource in any farm business. Those who plan, manage and do day-to-day work may well be the most important factor in determining a farm operation’s success. The human resources base for your farm includes you and others in your family or household who contribute time and effort to the operation. It also includes full-time and part-time employees, interns, consultants you hire to provide specialized advice or expertise, and other resource providers such as local production specialists or neighbors.

Your assessment of your farm’s human resources should answer the following questions: • Current Work Force: Who is involved in our business and what roles do they play? • Skills: What are our unique skills? What skills do we lack? • Change: Will our labor situation change in the near future? Will someone enter or leave the operation?

Use Worksheets 2.8 and 2.9 to record your answers as you work through this section. 2 TASK 46 BUILDING A SUSTAINABLE BUSINESS 3 FINPACK software, Center for Farm Financial Management, University of Minnesota, updated annually. ....... .......

The Four Key Management Areas: • Marketing • Operations ; Human Resources • Finance