--- Risk Management Alternatives ---

4 TASK 156 BUILDING A SUSTAINABLE BUSINESS Cash and credit reserves. Holding your own cash reserves or building credit reserves with your lender are common risk management strategies for improving liquidity. Credit reserves take the form of carry-over debt, refinancing and emergency credit. Use of credit reserves typically requires that you have a good, established relationship with a lender as well as a strategy for managing production and market-related risk.

Insurance. Insurance is often used by crop producers to reduce yield-related income risk. The Federal Crop Insurance Corporation (FCIC) and private crop insurance vendors offer insurance programs to help producers control crop production risk at a reasonable cost. Insurance provides a financial safety net in case of severe production losses or low crop prices. It provides two important benefits: a reliable level of cash flow and more flexibility in marketing plans.56 Other forms of insurance include property, health, liability and export insurance.

Enterprise diversification. Farms that produce one product are vulnerable to changes in market trends. Enterprise diversification provides some financial protection in fluctuating markets and against production catastrophe should one product fail. Enterprise diversification also allows the business owner to average profit and loss over different products and to combine two products (such as cheese and herbs) for value-added profit.57 One of the disadvantages of enterprise diversification can be the loss of production and management efficiency that is present with specialized operations.

Government programs. Historically, government programs have helped farmers mitigate short-term, price-related market risks. Under the Farm Security and Rural Investment Act 2002 direct payments, counter-cyclical market price supports and marketing loans were instituted for program crops and qualifying acreage. Moreover, provisions were made in the 2002 bill to defer some of the costs associated with organic conversion and compliance, among other things. For a full description of current farm bill provisions, contact the USDA or visit their website: www.usda.gov/farmbill/.

Hedging with futures. Hedging involves the sale of a futures contract at harvest time with the expectation of market price increases. You earn the difference between the price at which you initially sold the futures contract and the price at which you buy it back weeks or months later. Of course, if the price falls between the time that you hedged your crop or livestock and repurchased the futures contract, you will incur a loss.

Futures are not available for all crops and livestock. When using futures, you must determine whether or not you can realistically meet product quantity and delivery dates.

Income diversification. Supplementing farm income with cash from other sources, such as off-farm employment, can help balance negative fluctuations in cash farm income and, in some cases, provide a reliable or steady stream of income for your household. According to a 1996 nationwide survey by USDA, 82 percent of all farm households generated off- farm income that exceeded their farm income.58 Investment diversification. Diversifying investments among farm and nonfarm assets is a relatively new risk management strategy among farmers. Research has shown that farm and nonfarm asset values fluctuate inversely. In other words, when farm asset values are declining, the value of stocks, treasury bills, certificates of deposit and bonds are typically on the rise. 59 Leasing. Leasing land, machinery, equipment or livestock is one way to minimize financial risk and create flexibility.

Leasing allows you, the producer, to gain access to equipment and land without making long-term payment commitments. This frees up cash and investment funds for other uses. The primary disadvantage to leasing is that you do not have the opportunity to build equity or loan collateral.

Production and marketing contracts. Production contracts typically give the contractor considerable control over the production process. Under the contract, the contractor specifies varieties, breeds and production timing to ensure final-product quality. Inputs are usually supplied by the contractor. In exchange for their loss of management control, producers are usually compensated with financial incentives. Production contracts have become common in the livestock sector and are increasingly available in the specialty commodity sector. Brokers, handlers, seed companies, grain processors and other intermediaries regularly contract for specialty commodities such as food- grade corn, tofu-grade soybeans and organic feed grains.

Marketing contracts are either verbal or written agreements between the buyer (contractor) and producer (contractee).

Typically, responsibility for breed or variety selection is retained by the producer. A price is usually determined in advance of harvest and delivery terms are specified.

Premiums and discounts may be established for grain that does not match quality specifications under both production and marketing contracts. Flat price contracts, where the buyer agrees to pay a fixed price per unit, are the most common form of marketing contracts.

Storage. On-farm storage such as grain bins, containers and freezers allow grain producers to spread out sales over a 12-month period, much like livestock producers, and extend the marketing season (in the case of fresh vegetables, grain and meat cuts). One disadvantage of storage as a risk manage ment tool is expense, although the use of containers for small lots of identity-preserved grain is a fairly low cost option.

Figure 76.

Risk Management Alternatives55