--- “Building a Sustainable Business: A Guide to Developing a Business Plan for ---

Preface 4 BUILDING A SUSTAINABLE BUSINESS Business planning is an important part of owning and managing a farm.

Producers traditionally go through the business planning process to: • Evaluate production alternatives; • Identify new market opportunities; and • Communicate their ideas to lenders, business partners and family.

As agricultural entrepreneurs define and create themselves away from more “conventional” farming models, business planning has become more important than ever.

Producers considering innovative management practices and immature markets use business plans to map out strategies for taking advantage of new opportunities such as organic farming, on-farm processing, direct marketing and rural tourism. A business plan helps producers demonstrate that they have fully researched their proposed alternative; they know how to produce their product, how to sell what they produce, and how to manage financial risk. “Building a Sustainable Business: A Guide to Developing a Business Plan for Farms and Rural Businesses” was conceived in 1996 by a planning team for the Minnesota Institute for Sustainable Agriculture (MISA), to address the evolving business planning needs of beginning and experienced rural entrepreneurs.

From the onset, the planning team envisioned a truly useful guidebook that would be relevant to the alternative farm operations and rural businesses of today. There are certainly more detailed business planning, strategy building, succession planning, marketing and financial planning resources available.

It was not our intention to replace these materials. Many of these existing resources are listed in an extensive “Resources” section at the end of this Guide. Instead, our objective was to compile information from all available resources, including farmers and other business experts, that could be used to create a business planning primer—a guide that will help today’s alternative agriculture entrepreneurs work through the planning process and to begin developing their business plans.

This Guide was developed over a period of seven years by a team of University of Minnesota faculty and staff, individual farmers and consultants.

Six farmers developed business plans using the draft materials. This Guide incorporates recommendations on content, language and organization from