--- Page 73 ---

63 Introduction to implementing practices at field level Action point 5 is implementing practices at field level. CSA practices address at least two of the three pillars of the CSA approach (sustainably increasing agricultural productivity and improving farmers’ incomes, building resilience and adaptation to the effects of climate change, and, where possible, reducing and/or removing GHG emissions) simultaneously. CSA is a context-specific approach.

Indeed, what constitutes a climate-smart practice in one site may not be considered climate-smart in another site. The implementation of climate-smart practices at field level should be guided by site- specific socio-economic and environmental circumstances. This implies that several crucial factors should be considered during the design and implementation of the practices. This introduction briefly describes some of these factors, drawing on FAO’s CSA Sourcebook (FAO, 2021a).26 The selection and implementation of CSA practices should be based on solid stakeholder consultations to ensure an engaged process in which valuable knowledge and networks are included.

Local knowledge and priorities should form part of the evidence base used for the selection of CSA practices. Indeed, local knowledge on the environment, agro-ecosystems, crops and livestock, forests, fish and local climatic patterns is often a very valuable source of information when choosing the best CSA practices. Local knowledge should also be taken into account throughout the implementation of the selected practices. It is important to engage farmers, pastoralists, foresters and fishers, as well as local project managers and institutions, throughout the selection and implementation process.

CSA practices may influence and/or be influenced by differences in the circumstances of men and women, as well as the relationships between them. Climate change may affect women and men differently, and they may have different capacities to adapt to it. Globally, women play a crucial role in food and agricultural systems, and CSA practices may not reach their full potential if they are gender-blind.

CSA practices may also play a role in improving social protection and rural employment, and thus help ensure that no one is left behind. Where the implementation of CSA practices leads to job creation, this can contribute to the potential of the agriculture sector to provide environmental and socio-economic benefits. Improving social protection may boost food security, as well as increase resilience to the effects of climate change and support climate change mitigation.

If a CSA practice (partly) aims to contribute to climate change resilience, it may be important to explore potential linkages with disaster risk reduction.

A wealth of knowledge can be generated during and after the implementation of CSA practices. This knowledge may contribute to the creation of a knowledge feedback loop from action point 5 to action point 1 of CSA implementation.

The FAO CSA Sourcebook offers more information on climate impact assessments and appraisals of CSA options, CSA programme and project monitoring and evaluation, and the theory of change for CSA.

The five case studies in this chapter illustrate how the selection of climate-smart practices depends on the context. They also reveal how other CSA action points can create and enabling environment. 26 For more information on CSA and the factors discussed in this introduction, please see the various modules of Section C of FAO’s CSA sourcebook, available online at www.fao.org/climate-smart-agriculture-sourcebook/enabling-frameworks.