--- Page 22 ---

12
The Save and Grow project in Sri Lanka addresses a need to assess climate change impacts on crops as a fundamental
first step towards developing evidence-based adaptation policies and strategies, and towards guaranteeing
sustainable pathways for the mainstreaming of adapted agronomic practices.
The project recognizes that rather than adopting a one-size-fits-all solution, a range of proven agronomic practices can
be adapted to address the needs and resource endowment of farmers and help them cope with climate change.
Description
Through the Save and Grow project, FAO is training farmers to optimize the use of water, labour and machinery to
reduce drudgery and distribute the demand for labour more efficiently between lowlands and uplands throughout the
year. The project contributes to the building of the evidence base for CSA through the assessment of future climate
change impacts on six main crops i.e. rice, maize, green gram, onion, chilli and potato. These crops were selected
based on their economic relevance, their importance in terms of food security, their agronomic health, their impact
on employment, their climatic vulnerability and resilience, and market prices and price fluctuations.
Projected future changes for the six crops were calculated as the yield difference between future and historical yields
for each combination of climate data modelled with six general circulation models, two representative concentration
pathways (RCP 4.5 and RCP 8.5) and two future periods (middle and far future, up to 2100) (Amarasingha et al.,
forthcoming). Understanding the potential impact of climate change on these crops helps identify vulnerabilities of
farmers to the effects of climate change. The studies also provide a basis for proposing climate-smart practices that
may strengthen farmers’ resilience as compared to their previous (baseline) activities.
Furthermore, the findings of the climate impact assessment provide the evidence base that policy makers need to
make informed decisions and formulate climate change adaptation strategies. The assessment process itself creates
a framework for cooperation among national and international institutions.
Outcomes
By mitigating the causes and the impacts of climate change, the project directly contributes to SDG 2 (Zero hunger),
SDG 12 (Responsible consumption and production) and SDG 13 (Climate action).
The outputs of this project include:

Over 1 130 farmers and service providers received training on climate-smart crop production practices in six
different villages in the district of Anuradhapura. One of these villages is the “CSA village” that was established
in the country by the researchers and observes very strict CSA procedures in order to preserve the site. This
project described in this chapter is the only project allowed in the CSA village. The lessons learned thanks to
the collaboration between researchers will be used for training purposes. The monitoring of practices over
time will also allow for adaptive management and consequent adjustment of agronomic protocols.

Training videos for farmers and guides for climate-smart crop production were developed.4

Agricultural machinery was procured, tested under local conditions and made available to farmers.5

Government and small entrepreneurs worked together to provide farmers with access to sustainable
production inputs, output markets and services. This enabled farmers to sell more high-quality produce on
stable markets at higher prices.
Table 1 summarizes the outcomes (impacts on beneficiaries) of the project.
4 The videos are available online at www.fao.org/in-action/save-grow-climate-smart/resources/videos.
5 For news on sustainable agricultural mechanization, see www.fao.org/sustainable-agricultural-mechanization/resources/news.