--- such as (I)NDCs, NAMAs, NAIPs, NAPs, NAPAs and REDD+ strategies and action plans. Finally, ---

49
Introduction to enhancing funding and
financing options
Action point 4 of implementing CSA is enhancing funding and financing options. This introduction
to action point 4 draws on FAO’s CSA Sourcebook (FAO, 2021a).23
Efforts to enhance funding and financing options for CSA may include:

improving access to domestic and international funding and financing instruments (including
the GCF, the GEF, ODA and national sectoral budgets) and ensuring that more public and
private money becomes available for CSA;

linking climate funds and financing to public and private agricultural investments in
innovative ways; and

integrating climate change considerations and CSA in agricultural strategies, plans and
budgets, as well as in rural development programmes and projects.
Intergovernmental, governmental and private sector entities provide financial resources for the
development and implementation of CSA policies and strategies. Climate funding and financing
increasingly includes windows for agricultural investments. Links between climate and agriculture
funding and financing are important. Strong monitoring and evaluation is required for adequate
reporting on the benefits of adaptation and mitigation efforts.
The existence of a strong evidence base, a national strategic CSA framework and capable institutions
can help countries take advantage of intergovernmental funding mechanisms such as the GCF and
the GEF. To enhance access to such resources, it is also crucial to mainstream CSA in frameworks
such as (I)NDCs, NAMAs, NAIPs, NAPs, NAPAs and REDD+ strategies and action plans. Finally,
climate change issues may be integrated into sectoral planning and budgeting.
Importantly, government investment in CSA may serve as a catalyst for private sector investment;
it may thus lead to the wider scaling up of CSA practices and therefore to greater and sustainable
agricultural productivity, increased resilience and capability to adapt to climate change, and the
reduction and/or removal of GHG emissions.
The three case studies in this chapter illustrate various aspects of CSA action point 4, including
accessing and leveraging international climate funding and financing for CSA. The case studies
highlight interventions at field level (e.g. improving access to financial resources and providing
financial incentives to farmers) and illustrate how public-private partnerships can help attract
resources for CSA implementation. As such, the studies expand understanding of the scope of this
action point.
23 For a more detailed discussion of action point 4, please consult section C4 of FAO’s CSA sourcebook, available online at www.fao.org/
climate-smart-agriculture-sourcebook/enabling-frameworks/module-c4-finance/c4-overview.