--- IFAD’s Agriculture Modernization, Market Access and Resilience (AMMAR) project in Georgia (2015−2021) has ---

74 Georgia − enhancing agricultural resilience to climate change by developing inclusive climate-smart value chains Introduction IFAD’s Agriculture Modernization, Market Access and Resilience (AMMAR) project in Georgia (2015−2021) has provided a substantial contribution to the development of inclusive climate-smart value chains in the country. Thus, the project – which focuses on smallholder farmers and rural enterprises − has enhanced the resilience of Georgia’s agriculture sector to climate change and boosted private sector investments. The project has mainstreamed a climate- smart approach throughout its various activities, which include the development of irrigation and value chain infrastructures, the restoration of landscapes through the expansion of windbreak surfaces, the facilitation of policy dialogue on climate-resilient value chains, the creation of demonstration plots and the provision of CSA training. The project is financed with an IFAD loan and grant, GEF grants, contributions from the Government of Georgia and private investments from farmers and agribusinesses. The AMMAR project is executed by the Georgian Ministry of Environmental Protection and Agriculture and is implemented by the Rural and Agricultural Development Fund.

Rationale The agriculture sector in Georgia is highly vulnerable to climate change and climate variability, leading to serious problems of production loss and threats to food security under a business-as-usual scenario. Recent extreme weather events (including floods, windstorms and drought) have contributed to a marked trend of land degradation throughout the country, as well as a shifting aridification trend that is poised to heavily affect the already semi-arid eastern portions of Georgia by the end of the century. Smallholder farmers in the country are highly sensitive to climate change due to their heavy reliance on subsistence agriculture. Their lack of access to financial resources and technologies and limited adaptation knowledge results in a low adaptive capacity and higher vulnerability to extreme events, unpredictable climate variations and environmental degradation caused by the combined effects of anthropogenic factors and climate change. Against this backdrop, the AMMAR project is designed to address urgent climate resilience challenges as part of the Ministry of Environmental Protection and Agriculture’s substantial ongoing investments to modernize agriculture in Georgia. The project is fully aligned with the country’s Strategy for Agriculture Development (2015−2020) and its supporting action plan.

Description The project activities are organized into two mutually supportive components (Component 1: irrigation and agricultural value chain investment, and Component 2: climate-smart agricultural and value chain development) ©IFAD