--- production may be increased sustainably include South East Asia and West Africa. The ESG report helps countries ---

51
Rice production both causes and is affected by climate change. It is estimated that rice production is responsible for
10 percent of global methane emissions (The Food and Land Use Coalition, 2021) and that irrigated rice production
accounts for 34 to 43 percent of total global irrigation water use (Global Rice Science Partnership, 2013). At the
same time, models suggest that climate change may lead to a decline in rice production of 14 percent in South Asia,
15 percent in sub-Saharan Africa and 10 percent in East Asia and the Pacific between 2000 and 2050 (Nelson et al.,
2009). Rising sea water levels present an additional problem in deltaic regions, as they lead to sea water intrusion
and thus salinization, which negatively affects rice productivity (Earth Security Group, 2019; World Bank, 2015).
The multiple challenges faced by rice production are exacerbated by its scattered nature. At the same time, however, the
rice sector presents opportunities to realize the three pillars of CSA, namely sustainably increasing incomes, adapting
to the effects of climate change and mitigating GHG emissions. This potential is recognized in many countries’ NDCs,
with 48 countries indicating that they aim to invest in climate-smart rice production systems. Regions where rice
production may be increased sustainably include South East Asia and West Africa. The ESG report helps countries
identify opportunities for funding and financing to meet these goals. SRLI combines actions in the areas of policymaking
and planning, the improvement of production practices, the development of market-based instruments and knowledge
management. Actions are currently being implemented in South East Asia and South Asia.
Description
SRLI was launched in 2018 during the sixth GEF general assembly meeting in Danang, Viet Nam. In 2019, SRLI partners
signed a partner statement of intent (Sustainable Rice Landscapes Consortium, 2019) to signal their commitment to
work together towards results at scale. SRLI builds on the work of SRP and seeks to engage diverse stakeholders in
efforts to reap the opportunities identified in the ESG report, starting in South Asia and South East Asia. The initiative
has adopted a multi-stakeholder approach to reach results at scale. It works to attract funding from international
climate funds and facilities. These results may be delivered based on financing given to the consortium, the relevant
national governments, or implementation agencies who work with farmers and civil society (WBCSD, undated).
As laid out in the ESG report (ESG, 2019), the definition of a sustainable rice sector relates closely to the three pillars
of CSA: “a sustainable rice sector is defined as one that is affordable, improves the livelihoods of rice producers and
significantly reduces the environmental impact of rice production.”
Outcomes
SRLI is currently collaborating with the national governments of rice-growing countries in South East Asia and South
Asia. During a first phase, SRLI focused on working together with the GEF and national governments to develop a
series of national programmes on sustainable rice landscapes. GEF projects supported by SRLI or projects with an
SRLI-related component are now being developed in nine countries in Asia. Over USD 60 million in GEF resources
and roughly USD 800 million in co-financing from the public and private sectors are dedicated to these projects. The
projects bring together public and private sector organizations operating at national and regional levels to improve
consumers’ recognition of sustainable rice, and thus boost its demand. In addition, the projects aim to improve
the sustainability of rice production systems by promoting the wide-scale adoption of the SRP Sustainable Rice
Standard by farmers, as well as the widespread integration of these standards in corporate procurement guidelines.25
A number of projects foresee the formation of national SRP chapters to strengthen country ownership of the SRP
standards and provide a basis for the scaling up of sustainable rice production practices and products.
SRLI is currently moving into a next phase, focusing on three strategic areas:

the sharing of lessons learned on sustainable rice production between countries;

the harnessing of public-private partnerships to raise funds and financing for sustainable rice production;
and

the integration of next-generation knowledge management in rice production systems.
SRLI is considering opportunities to expand its activities into West Africa and Latin America.
25 For more information on the Sustainable Rice Standard, see http://www.sustainablerice.org/Resources/#srp-standard.