--- Crops Research Institute for the Semi-Arid Tropics [ICRISAT] and CIAT) to develop CSA country profiles; these ---

32
transportation costs. In addition, they have limited natural resources and opportunities to exploit economies of
scale, due to their small size. For all these reasons, the African agriculture sector in general, and that of SIDS in
particular, is struggling to meet food and nutrition security needs.
In most African countries, GHG emissions are relatively limited. However, these countries do include mitigation
goals in their national development policies in view of their extreme vulnerability to climate change, and to contribute
to the implementation of the Paris Agreement. The implementation of adaptation measures has also been identified
as a priority in most African countries’ NDCs.
The interlinkages between the agriculture sector (including crop and livestock production, forestry and agroforestry,
and fisheries) in African countries call for policymakers to explore the synergies between actions at the national,
subregional and regional levels.
Coordinated policies may provide an effective way to address these multiple challenges. To formulate comprehensive
and effective policies, policymakers need an overview of relevant climate challenges and solutions, as well as of the
factors that influence or hinder the adoption of CSA practices and technologies. Together with CGIAR, FAO has
over the past five years been working to help countries develop CSA profiles, with a view to providing essential
baseline information for the development of integrated climate change adaptation and mitigation programmes and
projects.
Description
To support countries in their efforts to transform agriculture in a context of climate change, FAO’s Regional Office
for Africa partnered with various GCIAR programmes and research centres (including CCAFS, the International
Crops Research Institute for the Semi-Arid Tropics [ICRISAT] and CIAT) to develop CSA country profiles; these
profiles provide an important contribution to the implementation of evidence-based climate actions.
The content of the country profiles is organized in various sections, including:

description of the economic and social (demography, gender) context;

land use and agricultural production systems;

food security and nutrition;

GHG emissions from agriculture;

climate change’s current and projected impacts due to changes in temperature and precipitation;

an inventory of adapted CSA technologies; and

the institutional, financial and policy framework.
The objective of the profiles is to provide an evidence base for decisions as to which actions to undertake. CSA
technologies and practices that are already being used are assessed for their compliance with CSA principles, based
on the three CSA pillars (productivity, adaptation and mitigation).
The CSA country profiles analyse the links between the evidence found, and gaps and opportunities in policymaking.
Recognizing that there is no one-size-fits-all policy solution, the profiles present policy instruments related to
climate change, agriculture and sustainability grouped under three main stages (formulation, formalization and
active implementation).
As far as the strengthening of national institutions is concerned, the country profiles identify institutions that
undertake key CSA-related activities and highlight opportunities to strengthen local institutions.
Most of the countries for which CSA profiles have been developed do not currently earmark funding specifically for
CSA. The profiles therefore provide an overview of the countries’ history of funding and financing efforts related to
agriculture and environmental sustainability that contribute to the achievement of CSA; they also identify potential
sources of funding and financing for CSA actions. In addition, the profiles highlight links between climate funding
and financing and public and private agricultural investments.