--- Reduce and/or remove GHG emissions ---

73 Adapt and build resilience of people and food systems to climate change The climate-smart livestock project aims to strengthen resilience and adaptive capacities to climate risk. The adoption of efficient cattle management practices under the project resulted in the conservation of forests on 3 275 hectares, and the restoration of forests on 438 hectares.

In addition, the climate-smart livestock project developed a climate risk study using 46 indicators to estimate the vulnerability level of beef and dairy cattle production systems to the most important climatic threats in the targeted provinces (Ecuador, Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock, Ecuador, Ministry of the Environment and FAO, 2019).

The study used 11 indicators to quantify climate risk, adaptive capacity and vulnerability at farm level with a web application.29 The project monitored the implementation of measures in the seven targeted provinces in 2019 and 2020, and found that adaptive capacity had increased by 10.61 percent, vulnerability had decreased by 5.20 percent and climate risk had fallen by 5.80 percent in comparison with 2017. As a result, the vulnerability status of the cattle production system in Ecuador decreased from “moderate” to “low” (Ecuador, Ministry of the Environment and Water and Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock, 2020).

The climate-smart cocoa project works on the basis of chakras, a term used by the Amazonian Kichwa population to refer to small agricultural plots. Chakras are millennial agroforestry systems of itinerant agriculture; they help preserve biodiversity and healthy soils, reserve spaces for forests and guarantee food security. Chakras provide the most effective and dynamic space for the conservation and in situ propagation of Amazonian agrobiodiversity. They are also spaces where families exchange and reproduce ancestral knowledge. By promoting the chakra system, the project helps farmers adapt to the effects of climate change.

Reduce and/or remove GHG emissions The Global Livestock Environmental Assessment Model developed by FAO was used as a basis to develop two tools to monitor GHG emissions (one at the national level, and the other at farm level) under the projects in Ecuador. The farm-level tool, which is based on a web application, displays total farm emissions, the intensity of emissions and a reference value for the region. Based on this information, farmers can improve their productive systems and reduce their emissions.

The monitoring of the impacts of the implementation of good livestock practices indicate that 75 271.29 tonnes of CO2eq were reduced over four years of field execution (Ecuador, Ministry of the Environment and Water and Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock, 2020). The methodology for the quantification of the sequestered carbon in pastures was developed by the project team. It showed a fixation of carbon in 2018 of 27 649.40 tonnes, in 2019 of 30 647.62 tonnes, in 2020 of 36 498.16 tonnes and in 2021 of 43 436.29 tonnes, for a total of 138 231.38 tonnes (Ecuador, Ministry of the Environment and Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock, Aquaculture and Fisheries, 2020).

Monitoring GHG emissions and adaptive capacity in the livestock sector after the implementation of climate-smart livestock practices is one of the most important activities of the project. The results of monitoring on the 165 pilot farms indicate that productivity has improved by 12.85 percent, GHG emissions have fallen by 26.27 percent and adaptive capacity has increased by 10.61 percent (Ecuador, Ministry of the Environment and Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock, Aquaculture and Fisheries, 2020).

The climate-smart cocoa project collaborates with the Ministry of the Environment and Water to develop a methodology to measure carbon sequestration. It also promotes low-emission cocoa products and views the Amazonian chakra system as a valuable carbon reservoir. 29 The web tool to monitor adaptive capacity, vulnerability and climate risk at farm level is available at http://ganaderiaclimaticamenteinteligente.com.

This case study was submitted by FAO’s country office in Ecuador. FAO-EC@fao.org.