--- 4. Interlinkages Between Circular Agriculture, the Circular Economy and Sustainable ---

Agronomy 2024, 14, 2423 8 of 15 policies related to WtE projects/interventions and the absence of coordination between different governmental institutions [75].

Furthermore, as the cities in this region grow into higher-income communities, the dynamics of waste production are expected to change, from higher proportions of food and green (biodegradable) waste to more solid dry waste that could be recycled, including plastic, paper, cardboard, metal and glass [75]. Although this presents another potential challenge, especially regarding the available waste management options, the choice of an appropriate waste management option is significant, as not all technologically supported options, such as incineration or open dumping without gas-capturing mechanisms in landfills, are compatible with the principles of circularity. Waste-to energy investments present the best opportunities for developing nations. This is because, in addition to reducing greenhouse emissions, such investments are anticipated to create employment opportunities for the surrounding communities [79].

The countries in SSA can also work to fulfill the goals of the second principle of circularity in agriculture—the efficient use of resources. Instead of clearing more land for agricultural production, producers and governments can invest in projects that help to reduce food losses. This can largely be achieved through investing in improving the quality of and access to storage facilities and efficient transport systems. There are a few reports on efforts in various SSA countries to address food loses and improve the use of renewable resources. Examples of such initiatives are Taimba, a Nairobi-based agri-tech initiative that consists of a mobile-based cashless platform that connects farmers to retailers, and Twiga, which is a Kenyan business-to-business (B2B) food distribution platform. Both of these use technology to provide efficient delivery while reducing the loss of food supplies. 4. Interlinkages Between Circular Agriculture, the Circular Economy and Sustainable Soil Management in Selected Countries The circular economy is an economic development model designed to promote all practices that lead to extracting the maximum value from finite resources through extend- ing their lifetimes, while protecting and improving the environment, advancing economic development and job creation, bolstering the roles of women and providing opportunities for youth [80]. If well implemented, it should replace the linear, conceptually unsustain- able “take–make–waste” economic model that dominates economic activities and global supply chains. To achieve circularity in the economy, there must be sustainable resource management such that finite resources are carefully managed, avoiding their depletion and maximizing products’ use potential as we reuse, recycle and refurbish them. In other words, the circular economy aims at decoupling economic growth from environmental degradation, increasing resource efficiency and promoting sustainable lifestyles [81].

According to the definition put forward by the Ellen MacArthur Foundation [2], the circularity of the economy revolves around three main pillars: (a) eliminating waste and pollution, (b) circulating products and materials (at their highest value) and (c) regenerating nature. Regarding the first pillar of eliminating waste and pollution, the economy needs to be propelled towards the use of renewable energy and materials so that economic activities are decoupled from the indiscriminate consumption of finite resources [2]. This can be implemented at the production, processing/manufacturing or consumption stage of the product chain. The elimination of waste and pollution requires that we redesign all economic activities by providing an onward path after they have been used. Thus, everyday commodities must be designed in such a way that they can either be reused or recycled as other useful products, effectively returning them to useful ends. Over time, and if conducted correctly, this means that waste will not accumulate in the environment.

A direct linkage to agriculture lies in the principle of circulating products and materials at their highest value, with the goal of keeping materials in use either as products or as components and feedstock for other products after their initial use. In this way, food remains of agricultural origin and other greens could be processed into animal feed, hence effectively circulating the same materials from one product to another. In line with this