--- Ellis and Foth, 1997 ---

Soil Security 13 (2023) 100119 9 desire to increase joint work between research and practice (e.g., on- farm research networks) and thus expand knowledge transfer into practice, including evidence-based and site-specific recommendations (n = 52). For this purpose, workshops, field days, and ’peer-to-peer learning groups’ were mentioned several times (n = 25). Participants also expressed their desire for more lighthouse farms, on-farm research networks, and national soil biology monitoring programs to fully inte grate any lessons learned into practice (n = 9). Finally, the issue of agricultural education in terms of increasing teachings about soil fertility was highlighted several times (n = 16). Two quotes from the survey aptly described the call for greater attention to soil fertility: (1) ’the importance of healthy soil and how it should be treated definitely needs to be taught more in agricultural education! Curriculum/training/ courses need to be completely revised to teach soil fertility as one of the most important tasks in crop production’ and (2) ’those who do not know what to protect will only protect what they know’.

Discussion Soil is the one of the most important strategic resources in crop production. Agronomically relevant soil parameters include nutrient and water availability, biological activity, rootability, and air and heat balance; these parameters are responsible for plant health and thus high and stable yields (Ellis and Foth, 1997; Troeh and Thompson, 2005).

However, in addition to natural environmental conditions, all human-controlled interventions and actions can have consequences for the condition of agricultural soils and their productivity. Although this study did not present experimental data, the empirical insights into farming practice gained here provide unique information about soil fertility based on the broad and detailed experiences of the farmers and agricultural institutionalists surveyed. Considering that empirical ap proaches are relatively unconventional in agronomic research, this study should be seen as an extension of possibilities and may stimulate scientific discussion and future experimental research, particularly on-farm research.

The majority of respondents stated that soil fertility was of great importance at present and would become even more relevant in the future. Climate change, which will introduce new dynamics and un certainties for agricultural production, may be one of the most important reasons for this increase in the importance of soil fertility (Bayu and Li, 2020; Crane et al., 2011; Abid et al., 2016). Depending on region- and specific site-conditions, the predicted shift in the distribution of annual precipitation (from summer to winter) and overall increase in air tem perature will aggravate deficits in climatic water balance and drought stress during the main vegetation period, resulting in negative impacts on plant physiology and the soil moisture regime—and thus the nutrient and water supply of plants—as well as on soil life (Markonis et al., 2021; Altieri et al., 2015; Ebrahimi et al., 2016; Shelia et al., 2019). In light of this, adapting agriculture to climate change is essential. Accordingly, increasing the climate resilience and related yield stability of cropping systems through soil fertility improvement was shown to be the most important issue for respondents. This is in line with the top-ranked soil properties that were expected to be improved with greater soil fertility: (1) water storage capacity, (2) soil biological activity, (3) rootability, and (4) water infiltration rate. As water is often a limiting factor under climate change, the soil’s capability to take up and store water is crucial; in addition, having plants with a deep root system is desired as they can reach water in deeper soil layers. This is in line with the results of the bivariate analyses, which showed a significant negative correlation be tween the desired soil property ’water storage capacity’ and the envi ronmental co-variable ’annual average sum of precipitation’ at the farm sites (range 242–1300 mm, Ø 673 mm). This indicates that farmers working on drier sites are more interested in the soil’s water storage capacity than farmers on sites with higher amounts of precipitation.

Here, the support of soil microorganisms (e.g., mycorrhiza) comes into play, as they can act as ’water and nutrient miners’ for plants and increase their drought tolerance, which can also promote the climate resilience and yield stability of cropping systems (Williams et al., 2018; Zhang et al., 2019; Vlˇcek and Pohanka, 2020; Hoang et al., 2022; Ren wick et al., 2021). In addition to the higher risk of drought stress under climate change, projections also show an increase in the frequency of extreme weather events, such as storms or heavy rainfall events, which greatly amplify the risk of soil erosion and floods and significantly in crease production risk for farmers (Ray et al., 2015; Ray et al., 2019; V´arallyay, 2010; Wilcox et al., 2017; Smith et al., 2020). This was also reflected in the respondents’ answers as a significant negative correla tion (bivariate analysis) between the soil property of interest (‘aggregate stability’) and the environmental co-variable ’annual average sum of precipitation’ on the farm sites. The farmers who reported more rainfall had greater interest in the aggregate stability of their soils, i.a., to pre vent soil erosion due to heavy rainfall events and sustain soil fertility in the long term (stated in the free-text fields of the survey). Appropriately, the top-rated agronomic measure was ’year-round soil cover’, which is well supported within conservation agriculture as it helps to reduce the risk of soil erosion and soil evaporation (unproductive water losses) while supporting soil biology and improving the water infiltration rate (Williams et al., 2018; Michler et al., 2019; Giller et al., 2015).

As a clear outcome of this study, yield stability—or rather reducing the production risk (probability that the yield will fall below a crucial level)—is one of the most important aspects under climate change and is even more important than the absolute yield amount, especially with regard to climate change (as stated by the farmers surveyed). This can be entirely confirmed by the results of a recent empirical study by Macholdt et al. (2017) focusing on wheat in German crop production (Macholdt and Honermeier, 2017). In both studies, the surveyed farmers under lined that they are not interested in achieving the maximum yield—instead, they will tolerate somewhat lower yields in the case of better yield stability or lower production risk.

Appropriate management measures can be used with the aim of improving soil fertility and related soil properties; these measures also support the climate resilience and yield stability of cropping systems.

Catch cropping, diversified crop rotations with a positive humus bal ance, and year-round soil cover were rated by respondents to have the highest positive impact on soil fertility. This finding is also reflected in the results of many recent studies that addressed the functional and agronomic benefits of rotational crop diversity including catch cropping, especially in relation to the development of more sustainable agriculture practices under climate change (Furey and Tilman, 2021; Maitra, 2019; Shah et al., 2021; Triberti et al., 2016; Borase et al., 2020). Catch cropping and diversified crop rotation design were given nearly the same level of importance by the farmers and agricultural in stitutionalists surveyed. This may also be due to the fact that integrating catch crops is part of a favourable crop rotation design. All crop species differ in their capabilities; thus, crop choice can have a critical effect on soil properties. Similar to diversified crop rotations, catch cropping af fects the physical, chemical, and biological properties of soil (Scavo et al., 2022; Kirkegaard et al., 2008). Catch cropping and crop selection exploit the potential of plants to improve the structure and thus the physical properties of soil; in addition, the easily degradable organic matter of catch crop residuals has an important function as a nutrient source (Bodner et al., 2007; Meike and Jürgen, 2018). Crop species with a long taproot, such as alfalfa and rye, allow soil loosening and, at the same time, compaction around the root. This root penetration allows for the formation of macropores, which are responsible for better water infiltration. At the same time, aggregates are formed in the soil due to root penetration. The stability of these aggregates is achieved primarily by the root exudates of the plants but also by decomposing plant resi dues and polysaccharides excreted by bacteria (Angers and Caron, 1998). In addition, the improved macroporosity and the opening of the soil by the roots provide greater water infiltration and rootability, which was also highly supported by the respondents. The influence of culti vating crops that improve soil structure was considered of high M.K. Wolf et al.