--- Specific Examples: Objective 2, Intensified ---

8 | Smart Prosperity Institute
• Loblaws partners with Flashfood47 CDN, an app that
allows customers to purchase food items nearing
expiration at a reduced price of up to 50% off at
select Loblaws grocery stores.
• We-Food48 is a charitable organization in
Denmark that operates a supermarket selling
food that is past the best before date. Operated
by volunteers, We-Food has diverted an
estimated 125 tonnes of food by 2016 from
Danish landfills.
• FoodHero49 is an app run in partnership with IGA
that allows customers to purchase food that is
nearing expiry. The app also tracks the amount of
money saved by the customer from purchasing
discounted food, as well as the amount of CO2
emissions that have been curbed from avoiding
food waste.
Sustainable food choices
• Loblaw50 CDN has been selling cricket flour since
2018 in its stores across Canada. This is an
option for consumers who want to lower the
environmental impacts of their consumption.
Sustainable procurement
• Westbury Street Holdings51 is a firm in the UK
that facilitates supply chain management from
agricultural suppliers to restaurants and grocery
stores with sustainability at the forefront. They do
so by working with producers that meet or exceed
environmental standards as a part of accreditation
schemes.

The Ideal
•
Continued growth in each of these practices,
especially in sustainable food choices.
•
Limit the number of labels in use. As suggested by
the Consumer Goods Forum, the ideal labeling
codes are: ‘best if used by’ as a quality-based
date and ‘use by’ for food with safety concerns.
•
Promote the purchase of imperfect looking fruits
and vegetables.
•
Include motivational messaging on packaging to
motivate sustainable behaviour.
•
Use storage advice on packaging where possible
(i.e., for bananas ‘store in a cool, dry place’).
Specific Examples: Objective 2, Intensified
Product Use

Sharing economy
Cooperative supermarket
• BEES Coop52 in Brussels is a cooperative
supermarket where the customer is a co-operator.
The co-operator commits themselves to working
3 hours per month within the supermarket and
in return can shop at the supermarket. The
supermarket gives priority to local producers,
ecologically-grown products, and seasonal
products. They promote bulk food to reduce
packaging waste and promote food saving
behaviour.
Food sharing
• FoodSharing53 is an online platform that saves and
distributes surplus food in Germany and Austria. It
is entirely volunteer run. Any individuals, retailers
and produces can offer or collect food that would
otherwise be thrown away. Food must be passed
on for free before its expiry date.
• The Community Fridge54 CDN is a pilot program
by Food Sharing, a non-for profit organization in
Ottawa, Canada. The fridge will enable residents
and businesses to share surplus food and for
anyone to help themselves to quality food that
would otherwise be wasted. Vegetables, bread,
and sandwiches are all accepted. Raw meat,
fish, or eggs are not. ‘Home cooked’ food is not
accepted, only food prepared and cooked in
registered food businesses.

The Ideal
•
Continued growth in each of these practices.
Short term renting is not significantly
addressed by the sector.

The Ideal
•
Given the nature of agriculture and food, this
strategy is not applicable to this sector.