--- Specific Examples: Objective 3, Extending ---

Agri-Food: Part Three of the Global Sector Best Practices Series | 9
• Loop60 is a Finnish restaurant that collects 600kg
of surplus food each day from six suppliers and
supermarkets. It uses this collected food to create
high quality canteen food, gourmet meals, and
artisanal ice cream. Any remaining edible food is
directed to charities or composted.
• Boomerang61 CDN is a Canadian company that
produces flour from from brewing residues. In
addition to reducing food waste, this product
reduces the transportation, agricultural land and
water required for flour production, thus reducing
its carbon and water footprints
The Ideal
•
Set up food hubs to help reduce distribution
distance and reduce food spoilage due to
transportation.
•
Reduce risk of liability which may disincentivize
businesses from donating food.

Refurbishing is not significantly
addressed by the sector
Performance economy
Meal subscription service
• HelloFresh62 is an international subscription-
based meal service that delivers fresh, pre-
portioned ingredients, and recipes every week.
By pre-portioning ingredients, they help reduce
household food waste.
The Ideal
•
Meal subscription services deliver more nutrious
and afforadable meal boxes and reduce their
packaging waste
Specific Examples: Objective 3, Extending
Life of Products and Components
Maintenance and repair is not
significantly addressed by the sector.

The Ideal
•
Given the nature of agriculture and food, this
strategy is not applicable to this sector.

Donating and reselling
Surplus food recovery
• Food Mesh55 CDN is a tech platform that connects,
coordinates, and tracks food recovery through
their online marketplace and food recovery
program. Retailers donate their perishables to
Charity ‘Hubs’ that share their donations with
other charities and local farmers.
• Bourse aux Dons56 is a digital platform in Brussels,
Belgium that matches fresh produce collected
by the DREAM project to over 50 charities across
the city. The DREAM project collaborates with 20
professional merchants from the early morning
market in Brussels to collect over one ton of
excess fruits and vegetables every day.
• Metro57 CDN has, through their food recovery
program One More Bite, donated the equivalent
of over 6 million meals in 2018. This is equivalent
to more than 3,000 tonnes of food, a 90%
increase from 2017.
• La Tablée des Chefs58 is a Montreal-based
program that began in 2012 by providing culinary
educations to youth but quickly expanded to
developing a food recovery program. They
launched programs in Vancouver, Calgary, France,
and Mexico, recovering almost 250,000 portions
of food in 2013 alone.
Re-appropriation of surplus food
• Toast Ale Beer59 is a British company that uses
surplus bread from bakeries all over London to
make their beer.