--- Page 31 ---

The Circular Farm by Charlie Steer
A Nuffield Farming Scholarships Trust report generously sponsored by NFU Mutual Charitable Trust

| 25
k) Support anaerobic digestion to cut methane emissions, offset fossil fuel and provide a
renewable fuel compatible with existing infrastructure.
l)
Promote a precision landscape approach where supported interventions, such as
watercourse buffers and woodland planting are placed in the landscape to serve a multitude
of purposes rather than just one. Give the farmer the tools to measure the progress rather
than consume time with the process.

The Author:
m) Employ a system thinking approach and look at where value can be added on the farm by
seeking out expertise in flows of mass and energy, with the goal of developing a net zero
business by 2030. This will include:
i)
Increase the soil ‘savviness’ of the business, developing key performance indicators for a
healthy soil.
ii) Maximise the use of by-products across the farming system as inputs to the dairy and
arable operation, from soil amendments to food residues.
iii) Continually evaluate the carbon intensity of operations using an accredited carbon
calculation tool.
iv) Employ a precision land management approach. Using LiDAR technology overlaid with
exiting mapping data such as yield to identify:
(1) Above and below ground carbon.
(2) Overland flows, to identify areas for interventions, such as short rotation coppice.
(3) Poor preforming areas and opportunities to highlight these for biodiversity
increases, carbon storage or fuel production.
v) Explore the opportunities created by anaerobic digestion to highlight opportunities for:
(1) Gas and or electricity and heat production.
(2) Bio fertiliser.
(3) Reduction in carbon intensity for on-farm energy use (electrical and or bio-methane
powered machinery).
(4) Additional enterprises to compliment the flows of energy and biomass around the
farm, for example fish and fly farming?
vi) Evaluate the possibilities for additional renewables to complement the existing
infrastructure.
vii) Remember that knowledge is key. To keep expanding the knowledge of not only myself
but the team on the farm. Keeping an ‘ear to the ground’ for circular solutions and
encouraging tests and trials of these solution on the farm wherever possible.