--- Recommendations & principles for the Circular Farmer, the Policy ---

The Circular Farm by Charlie Steer
A Nuffield Farming Scholarships Trust report generously sponsored by NFU Mutual Charitable Trust

| 24
Recommendations & principles for the Circular Farmer, the Policy
Maker, and the Author
The Farmer:
a) Design is better than default, designing out waste across the farm from lean management to
reduce wasted time, through designing manure handling to reduce ammonia loss, measuring
soil carbon, examining overland flows to reduce diffuse pollution, or collaboration with
producers of biofertilser.
b) Embrace complexity, complexity has a critical mass, and a minimum level is required to
benefit from the synergies available.
c) Knowledge is essential, but you do not have to know everything, as per the well-known
saying ‘a Jack of all trades is a master of none… but often better than a master of one’.
Collaboration with experts will build and support the farmer’s knowledge.
d) Develop a system thinking toolbox. Those tools are the ability to see interconnection,
synthesis, and the whole rather than parts. To think in circles not lines and remove silos that
funnel thinking into the boxes.
e) Embrace diversity, the more diversity the more components to the farming system. Diversity
mitigates risk and is strength.
f) Identify functions that each component can fulfil, for example is it food, fuel, building
material, soil amendment or energy production?
g) Put the right component in the right place at the right time in the right amount, be it the
complimentary crops on a field scale or the precision management of a landscape.
The Policy Maker:
h) Adopt a zero-waste strategy to align with carbon dioxide reduction goals. Organisations such
as PACE pacecircular.org and the Ellen McArthur Foundation ellenmacarthurfoundation.org
are well resourced with specifics for policy makers and follow the lead of the Dutch and the
Danes.
i)
Remove barriers. The principals of the circular economy make sound environmental and
economic sense. They also present opportunities for GDP increases (if there is an insistence
on ‘growth’) and economies to operate within the planetary boundaries and above social
foundations. There are certain non-financial barriers in place such as regulation. These
hinder the advancement of the circular economy. The 2021 update to farming rules for
water are an example. They have unintended consequences and could serve to prevent the
application of vital humus to the soil.
j)
The farming sector requires a system thinking analysis to highlight opportunities for research
and development. There never is a ‘silver bullet’ but analysis and understanding of complex
systems such as modern food production is not easy or cheap but targeting and enabling the
scaling of waste reduction technologies, which create inputs for agriculture such as the
examples of CCm Technologies and Ostara should be part of the procurement or tendering
processes for waste management infrastructure. Developing mutually beneficial products
that benefit the environment, economy and secure a supply of sustainable farm inputs is a
good example of win-win thinking.