--- Fair Oaks Farm ---

The Circular Farm by Charlie Steer
A Nuffield Farming Scholarships Trust report generously sponsored by NFU Mutual Charitable Trust

| 17
Chapter 3: The Circular Farm – creating and capitalising on systems

The previous chapter gave an insight into the possibilities different technologies give as moving parts
in the farming system. To capitalise on circular systems, the ability to identify all the
interconnections on the farm is key. Management by design is most important. Adoption of this
‘Systems Thinking’ is key - it is always better to manage by design than default.
The following case studies demonstrate the possibilities for farming business when systems thinking
is employed, and dynamic complexity is embraced.
Fair Oaks Farm
Fair Oaks in Indiana is a remarkable setup. The beating heart of Mike and Sue McCloskey, Fair Oaks is
a 38,000-cow dairy business, apart from the scale, the business is truly multifaceted. Two aspects
worth mentioning, firstly the public-facing nature of the business. The farm has been dubbed the
‘Disneyland of agricultural tourism.’ It has a Marriot hotel, restaurant, cowfé, and three adventures
in crops, dairy, and pigs attracting half a million visitors per annum. The second is milk branding
selling milk to Coke-a-Cola who process into an ultra-filtered, lactose free, high protein, long life milk
called ‘Fairlife.’ The products under the Fairlife brand are aimed at the health, environmental and
animal welfare conscious consumer.
Setting aside the fascinating story of the tourism and supply chain aspects of the business, the
McCloskeys have developed a circular system with value added at each step.
•
Focus on soil and animal health to drive efficient production.
•
Anaerobic digestion to produce biogas and renewable electricity from manures.
•
A compressed natural gas filling station to enable a fleet of trucks to be run on carbon
negative fuel.
•
A bio fertiliser plant in collaboration with Gary Zimmer’s company Midwestern Bio-ag
producing a range of bio fertiliser products.
The farm is spread over 25,000 acres, which is used to grow the feedstuffs for the diary, this cropped
land is fertilised by the refined wastes from the livestock. The technology on display at Fair Oaks to
add value from the back end of the cow to the field involves several different processes.
1. The manure is fed directly into a plug flow anaerobic digester manufactured by US company
DVO. The outputs from the digester are biogas, which is scrubbed to remove the carbon
dioxide and hydrogen sulphide. A portion of this is burned in a gas engine to produce
electricity to power and heat the farms. Any surplus is exported to the electricity grid. The
remaining bio-methane is compressed to 275 bar (compressed using electricity from the gas
engine). It is then used in what was one of the first dairy to bio-methane filling stations in
the US opening in 2011. Adapted HGVs use the biomethane instead of diesel, saving up to
100% of carbon emissions per km travelled.
2. Cows are bedded on sand which requires separation from the digested manure using a sand
separation system. An inclined auger in a trough, uses gravity to settle the sand to the