--- where Professor Rogier Schulte is the chair of Farming Systems Ecology Group. The department’s ---

The Circular Farm by Charlie Steer
A Nuffield Farming Scholarships Trust report generously sponsored by NFU Mutual Charitable Trust

| 18
bottom of the tank where the auger slowly moves the sand uphill to exit the separator to be
reused for bedding.
3. Fibre is separated from the sand free manure, using a slope screen separator.
4. The separated liquid enters the Trident manure processing system which consists of three
stages. The first is a flocculation tank, where a polymer is added to stick the suspended
particles in clumps. This allows a dissolved air floatation tank to skim off the flocculated
sludge.
5. The flocculated sludge is passed through a disk stack separator, which has a low power
requirement and separates the DAF sludge producing 35% DM sludge. This is stored with the
separated solids from the slope screen separator in step 3. The entire process is powered by
renewable power from the digester.
6. The sludge and fibre from the Trident system is moved to a separate facility where it is used
as the base for a bio fertiliser treatment process. This makes a spreadable product marketed
as Terra Nu by Mid-Western BioAg. The bio fertiliser comes in several forms, all based on a
homogenous granules made from the digested manure. These have a full suite of macro and
micronutrients, with up to 6% nitrogen, 10% phosphorus and 8% potassium. Other
formulations include a 3:3:3 nitrogen, phosphorus, potassium and a calcium boosting
product. Terra Nu is high in carbon, which feeds soil microbiology as well as supplying
complete plant nutrition, resulting in an increase in crop yields over eighty-eight trials in
seven US states.
7. The remaining liquid is extremely low in suspended solids, and as a result has little nutrient
or odour, allowing it to be used in the farm’s irrigation systems.
Mike McCloskey has not stopped there; he has developed a system to take the process a step
further and in a single plant processes the digestate into:
1) Clean water.
2) Dry, pathogen free, and stable solids for use as bedding and/or soil amendments.
3) Concentrated liquid, organic nitrogen fertilizer.

This enables the farm to become a zero-discharge dairy. As can be appreciated this ‘holy grail’ of
manure processing has commercial sensitivity until its release. However, from the conversations
about the technology, the McCloskey’s will have a fully circular farming system, producing food and
energy on a grand scale.
Wageningen University
On a national scale the Netherlands is a leader not only in agricultural output, but also in the circular
economy. The Dutch government has committed to a zero-waste economy by 2050. It has a
transition plan in place, setting specific goals in this transition to fully circular economy running in
parallel with the Dutch climate agreement to cut emissions to 95% of pre-industrial levels by 2050.
Wageningen university is a leader in circular economic thinking and farming research and analysis
where Professor Rogier Schulte is the chair of Farming Systems Ecology Group. The department’s
mission is: “To equip all the ‘actors’ in the food system with the keys to unlock, redesign and
transition farming systems by experiencing, analysing, and learning from outstanding examples of