--- Chapter 2: No Such Thing as Waste ---

The Circular Farm by Charlie Steer
A Nuffield Farming Scholarships Trust report generously sponsored by NFU Mutual Charitable Trust

| 4
Chapter 2: No Such Thing as Waste
“Waste is only a resource in the wrong place” 2
Cheap food in the West is ‘easy come easy go’: there is little incentive for the farmer, processor, or
consumer to use every morsel. The scale of global food waste was put in perspective by the talk
given by Professor Frank Mithlomer at the 2019 Nuffield scholars CSC in Iowa.
Frank’s presentation included the following picture from the National Geographic magazine. The
picture demonstrates the
quantity of food wasted by
the average US family. On a
global scale, food waste is
cited as a third of all food
produced. The United
Nations Food and Agriculture
Organisation (FOA)
commented that if “Food
Waste” were a country it
would be the world’s third
largest emitter of carbon
dioxide after China and the
US.
If food waste is now a given and the societal changes required to eliminate it are embedded in
modern life, it represents an opportunity for agriculture within the circular economy. Food waste
can be intercepted at each stage of the food lifecycle in agricultural production, post-harvest
handling and storage, processing, distribution, consumption, end of life. Where there is a lot of
waste, there is a big opportunity for the innovative circular farmer.
Two Canadian visits directly addressed the opportunity created by food waste.
The Ross family and Elmira Biogas plant
Bio-EnPower Inc. Elmira was commissioned in 2014 as the first waste to bio-energy anaerobic
digester (AD) plant in Canada, an expansion in 2018 took the plant to 3MW electrical and 1.6MW
thermal energy, taking in c. 70,000T of ‘source separated organics’ (akin to UK brown bin food waste
collections) grease, expired food, and leftovers. The plant generates enough power for 2,800 homes
and is estimated to have saved the release of quarter of a million tonnes of carbon dioxide
equivalents at the time of visiting in 2020.
The plant contains patented de-packaging technology to remove 25% (and more) of inorganic
plastics and metals from waste before entering the AD process, allowing a wide range of feedstock
to be used. The intake area to the digester is fully enclosed and a three-step process ensures no
odour escapes from the intake area. The facility produces digestate pasteurised to Canadian Federal

2 Mahatma Gandhi