--- Chapter 1: The Circular Farm ---

The Circular Farm by Charlie Steer
A Nuffield Farming Scholarships Trust report generously sponsored by NFU Mutual Charitable Trust

| 3
Chapter 1: The Circular Farm
The Circular Economy
The circular economy is shaped by three principals1:
1. Design out waste and pollution. Most of the waste is created at the design stage of both
products and systems: change the mindset to view waste as a design flaw, or as a raw
ingredient for another process.
2. Keep products and materials in use. The waste of resources cannot continue: millions of
tonnes of materials, from plastic to potash, are disposed of or lost every year into
ecosystems, the atmosphere or water. Agriculture has been historically good at keeping
some things in use by remanufacturing, reusing, and repurposing; something a low margin
business must be good at. Conversely, vast quantities of nutrients and greenhouse gases
have been permanently lost into the environment where they cause irreversible damage
including climate change and the dead zone in the Gulf of Mexico (where algae blooms
deplete oxygen from the water).
3. Regenerate natural systems. Nature does not heed the concept of waste; the classic
example is a tree falling in the forest, decomposing by a perfectly orchestrated process to
become nutrients for further growth. By first observing, then using or mimicking natural
systems, natural resources can be enhanced. This concept is as old as agriculture itself using
organic manures, rotational diversity and fertility building crops and has been practised the
world over for thousands of years.
The Circular Farm
The above principles are used in the development of the Circular Farm. They focus on good yields,
the sparing use of resources and energy, whilst putting as little pressure on the environment, nature,
and climate as possible. The minimisation of inputs, be that in manufactured or mined fertilisers,
pesticides, concentrated feed, energy, or time are key factors in the design of the Circular Farm.
Keeping the residuals of farming, such as manure, other biomass and food processing within the
farm as a renewable resource is also a crucial part of the closed cycle. The more local the loop, the
more effect the systems in place.
The concept of the circular farm is as old as farming itself, not only in terms of nutrient cycling but all
materials - we all know farmers that refuse to throw anything away, with the hope that ‘it might
come in useful one day!’

1 The Ellen MacArthur Foundation https://ellenmacarthurfoundation.org