--- Van Eerd et al., 2014 ---

Soil Security 13 (2023) 100119 10 importance by more than one third of the farmers and institutionalists surveyed, and as many as 47 % of the farmers stated that they already implemented this measure on their farms. In particular, radish species (e.g., oil radish) are known to improve soil cohesion and break up soil compaction (Büchi et al., 2018). Having a good aggregate structure and macroporosity are prerequisites for rootability and a high air and water balance (Bodner et al., 2007). Diverse crop rotations, including catch cropping, can also help to increase soil organic matter and soil organic carbon contents, which are of great importance for stabilizing the soil structure and thereby improving water storage capacity and rootability (Shah et al., 2021; Triberti et al., 2016; Seitz et al., 2022; Karlen et al., 2013; Van Eerd et al., 2014). These were the top-ranked soil properties for farmers in this study and are important for the climate resilience and yield stability of cropping systems; they represent what the farmers desire to improve, as they use diverse rotations and catch cropping primarily "to maintain humus formation and [improve] water retention in the soil" (quote from the survey). Further comments from the re spondents focused on positive soil organic matter balances (e.g., ach ieved by leaving crop residues on the field) and organic-matter-amplifying crops, such as legumes, in the context of diversified crop rotations. All these agronomic measures result in dy namic soil structuring, higher organic matter content, higher soil moisture, and the release of root exudates, which lead to an increase in soil microbial activity (Niewiadomska et al., 2020; Gentsch et al., 2020).

The organic matter serves as food for both micro- and macrofauna in the soil, increasing microbial activity. As a result, higher soil enzyme ac tivity has been demonstrated, which results in greater levels of plant-available nutrients (Borase et al., 2020). This stimulation of soil biology was found to be highly desired by respondents in this study and reflects the mobilization of plant-available nutrients for nutrient carry over, particularly using catch crop mixtures and crop rotational di versity (Borase et al., 2020; Piotrowska-Długosz and Wilczewski, 2020; Heuermann et al., 2022). This leads to less dependence on external in puts, such as fertiliser, and higher sustainability in terms of the circular principle. The increase in soil enzyme activity can also have a disease-inhibiting effect, which increases plant health and the resilience of cropping systems to biotic stresses (Stomph et al., 2020; Thakur et al., 2021). Lastly, the use of diverse crop rotations including cover cropping with deep-rooting mycorrhizal plants can promote arbuscular mycor rhizal fungi, which provide root system extension and aggregation to support the water and nutrient supply of plants (Plenchette et al., 2005; Sosa-Hernandez et al., 2019). In addition, different plants have different nutrient requirements. Thus, if they do not compete for the same ecological niche and the soil is not depleted, yield increases can result (Giller et al., 2015; Maitra, 2019). Furthermore, the bioavailability of nutrients such as phosphorus, iron, zinc, and manganese can be increased because different crop species have different abilities to mobilize the soluble inorganic forms of nutrients (Piotrowska-Długosz and Wilczewski, 2020; Stomph et al., 2020). Overall, promoting soil fertility through the use of diverse crop rotations, including catch cropping, can help to increase the climate resilience and yield stability of cropping systems, especially in the face of ongoing climate change, as highlighted by the respondents.

However, according to the farmers’ comments (in the free-text fields of this survey), it is becoming increasingly difficult to expand and diversify crop rotations. The reasons for this are unfavourable economic conditions, a lack of recommendations and financial incentives, increasing lease prices, and higher costs. This shows that there is a high potential for future agriculture in this area, but it cannot be exploited today; a similar situation is observed for catch cropping. The area under catch crops is currently relatively low; however, it has increased from just under 1.2 million hectares in 2010 to almost 2 million hectares in 2020 (in relation to 11.6 million hectares of total German crop pro duction area), confirming the fact that catch crop cultivation is continuing to gain importance in Germany (Destatis 2022). This is also evident from the responses to our survey, as farmers and agricultural institutionalists ranked the positive impact of catch cropping as the most important for the promotion of soil fertility. However, only 57 % of the farmers surveyed indicated that they already used catch crops. Ac cording to Seitz et al., only one-third of winter fallow is used for cover crops, which means that cultivation and thus the return of organic matter could be tripled (Layek et al., 2018). Reasons for not cultivating catch crops were stated by farmers in free-text comments. For example, the lack of a legal framework and non-existent financial support were mentioned as being part of the problem. In addition, some farmers would like to see more official catch cropping and undersowing (e.g., rank legumes and corn as a support crop) field trials, the reliable results of which should be communicated more to encourage the spread of these systems. Furthermore, new perspectives should be emphasized, such as the grazing of catch crops, since in this way "no track damage by har vesting vehicles [occurs] and high-quality organic fertiliser for soil or ganisms […] [is] distributed reasonably evenly even without ruts." (quote from the survey). A broad uncertainty stated by farmers in this study was the water consumption of catch crops (transpiration losses > evaporation reduction) resulting in a lack of water for the following main crop (Bodner et al., 2007). This is in line with the results of the bivariate analyses, which showed a significant correlation between more farmers using catch crops on sites with a higher annual precipi tation, and vice versa (less catch cropping on drier sites with < 500 mm annual precipitation).

In this study, the respondents highlighted that sufficient organic matter return together with nutrient balance are important factors for sustaining soil fertility and consequently yield stability in the long term, which is in line with long-term analyses on cropping system perspectives (Macholdt et al., 2021; J. Macholdt et al., 2020; J. Macholdt et al., 2020; Faye et al., 2023; Reckling et al., 2016; Reckling et al., 2019). These studies recommended cultivating legumes and leaving crop residues on the field (green manure, return of organic matter, positive humus bal ance), in addition to adequate organic/mineral fertilisation. A quote from the survey echoes this: “having sufficient and thus proper fertil isation of the crop [is important] to prevent mineralization of the usually already scarce humus content by plant growth”. The use of organic fertilisers can help to offset the reduction in synthetic fertilisers (Ye et al., 2020), increase soil fertility while maintaining yield expectations, and allow management in a closed-loop system (Herencia et al., 2007).

The addition of organic fertiliser, particularly manure, can increase soil fertility by enriching organic matter. Accordingly, this significant in crease in organic matter may also lead to increased nutrient availability.

Higher levels of major nutrients, such as nitrogen, phosphorus, and potassium, and essential micronutrients can be assumed (Herencia et al., 2007). The improved physical and chemical soil properties and enhanced soil microbial community resulting from organic fertiliser application can further support the pH, air, and water balance of the soil (Ye et al., 2020; Han et al., 2021; Kumar et al., 2019). Despite all the benefits of organic fertilisation, the potential toxicity from heavy metals and naturally contained pathogens should also be addressed (Kumar et al., 2019). Furthermore, nutrient availability strongly depends on soil pH; thus, liming is also a relevant measure for soil fertility and crucial for a range of physical, chemical, and biological soil parameters, such as optimal nutrient supply and organic matter build-up (Haynes and Naidu, 1998; Olego et al., 2021; Bossolani et al., 2021). Accordingly, more than half of the farmers indicated that they used liming as a common measure, suggesting that it is considered to have as much value as fertilisation. The farmers surveyed reported using organic fertilisation and liming more often for agricultural soils of lower quality (significant negative correlation; bivariate analyses); on soils of higher quality, they tended to use these measures somewhat less often (range of soil quality index as stated by farmers: 28 % of soils with 18–39; 37 % of soils with 31–49; 35 % of soils with 60–90). Thus, the willingness and motivation of farmers to invest in soil fertility also depend on their soil`s quality. If the soil has a higher demand, improvements are often more noticeable and observable, for example, a payoff in yield or improvements in M.K. Wolf et al.