--- M.K. Wolf et al. ---

Soil Security 13 (2023) 100119 6 recommended sensor systems, while apps and digital tools were considered by only 3 % of farmers and 5 % of institutionalists (Fig. 5).

Although sensor systems and apps/digital tools for assessing soil fertility are not yet considered as the standard, some examples were still mentioned by respondents in the free-text fields. Based on the com ments, soil sensors were mostly used to measure moisture, temperature, pH, nitrogen content, electrical conductivity, and structural stability (n = 10). Field structure approaches (n = 9), remote sensing systems (e.g., satellites, aerial imagery, and drones) (n = 7), and soil maps (n = 5) were also employed. amongst apps, ’OneSoil’, ’Field structure’, ’My Farm 24′, ’CropSat’, and ’Farmblick’ were mentioned several times by respondents.

Agronomic management practices for promoting soil fertility Agronomic management practices can have positive impacts on soil fertility. To determine which sets of measures were recommended and used by farmers, the participants were given 20 agronomic measures on this topic. The farmers (Table 4) and agricultural institutionalists (Table 6) were asked to rate the importance of the measures based on a three-point Likert scale (high, intermediate, and low).

According to the farmers’ assessment of the management measures used to promote soil fertility (Table 4), diversified crop rotations with a positive humus balance (45 %), catch cropping (45 %), and year-round ground cover (41 %) were rated as having the greatest benefit. Under sowing, balanced nutrient balances, and mulch seeding with conserva tion tillage were ranked in the medium impact range. Meanwhile, the farmers reported that biostimulants, soil amendments/biostimulants (e. g., biochar), and agroforestry systems have a low impact on promoting soil fertility. A total of 37–42 % of the farmers abstained from answering this question.

Regarding the farmers’ implementation of agronomic management practices (last column in Table 4), the cultivation of catch crops (57 %), balanced nutrient supply (56 %), leaving crop residues on the field (55 Fig. 4. Positive effects on selected soil properties due to increased soil fertility expected by agricultural institutionalists (n = 215).

Fig. 5. Evaluation methods for soil fertility used by farmers and agricultural institutionalists (multiple answers allowed).

M.K. Wolf et al.