--- van Bruggen and Seme­ ---

Soil Security 13 (2023) 100119 2 addition to nutrient supply, a sufficient content of organic matter to retain water and nutrients, water availability, aeration, and plant sta bility are further essential properties (Estrada-Herrera et al., 2017). Soil fertility is a result of complex interactions between biological, chemical, and physical processes (Stockdale et al., 2002; van Bruggen and Seme nov, 2000). Physical soil properties mainly include the soil structure, i. e., the spatial arrangement of solids and voids. Soil structure has a major influence on air and water balance, water and nutrient storage, root penetration, susceptibility to erosion and compaction, and the habitat of soil organisms (Rabot et al., 2018). The chemical reactions that occur in the soil are primarily affected by pH; therefore, pH affects the cation and anion exchange capacity, nutrient and pollutant availability, and organic matter in the soil (Jones and Jacobsen, 2005). Earthworms, microorganisms, fungi, and many other species shape soil life, build up soil organic matter, and are essential for the biological component of soil fertility as they mineralize and mobilize necessary plant nutrients, thereby increasing nutrient and water availability (Chauhan, 2014).

Thus, high biodiversity, an intact food web, good internal nutrient cycling, and a high regeneration and buffering capacity are prerequisites for healthy soils in sustainable and climate-resilient crop production (van Bruggen and Semenov, 2000).

Despite the availability of numerous indicators of soil fertility, such as soil pH, soil organic matter content, available nutrient content (e.g., nitrate, phosphate), exchangeable bases (Ca, Mg, K), cation exchange capacity, soil respiration, microbial activity, microbial carbon/nitrogen content, soil life (e.g., the abundance of earth worms), and soil structure (e.g., bulk density), the assessment of soil fertility is still a complex and difficult task for researchers, and even more so for farmers (Estrada- Herrera et al., 2017). In addition to estimating soil structure and nutrient contents (via lab analyses of soil samples), field texture tests (spade test) and odour tests are often applied in farming practice (Rabot et al., 2018). Furthermore, soil analysis data can be collected using different methods (e.g., technical, analytical, sampling depth/intervals) (van Bruggen and Semenov, 2000). This shows that holistic assessment is not yet present in agriculture, as knowledge and methods are not yet united in one practical approach (El Chami et al., 2020). An additional challenge is that most changes in soil fertility need to be analysed from a long-term perspective, and significant changes are rarely observed from one year to the next; moreover, the distinction between the impact of agronomic management measures and environmental factors (e.g., climate, soil type, relief) on soil fertility is a difficult task (Watson et al., 2006).

Soil fertility is of basic relevance for two major points in current crop production: sustainability and climate resilience. In terms of sustain ability, a higher soil fertility is associated with higher soil biodiversity and better nutrient recycling and can help to reduce nitrous oxide emissions, the incidence of pests and diseases, and the use of pesticides, fertilisers, and fuel/energy (Watson et al., 2006; Bayu and Li, 2020).

With regard to climate change, a higher soil fertility can help to improve the climate resilience (abiotic stress tolerance to hot and drought periods or heavy rainfall events) of plants and entire cropping systems by increasing water availability, which results from increases in soil water storage capacity, rootability, and aggregate stability (Bayu and Li, 2020; Mondal, 2021; Sa et al., 2017; Crane et al., 2011).

Although soil fertility is essential for crop production, most studies dealing with this topic have focused on single factors and mainly used experimental approaches (field/pot trials). However, empirical ap proaches providing new insights into the complexities of soil fertility in farming practice have been scarcely applied so far (Primbs, 2021). The current empirical study was carried out to help close this gap. The objective of this study was to provide new insights into farming practice with respect to the present and future importance of soil fertility for crop production. Based on the responses collected from farmers and agri cultural institutionalists, the main objective of the survey was to answer the following five questions: (1) What is the importance of soil fertility in agronomy, both now and in the future? (2) What are the motives for agronomic investments in greater soil fertility? (3) Which soil properties are expected to be improved from greater soil fertility? (4) What kind of agronomic measures are recommended and used in practice to promote soil fertility? (5) What are the demands of farmers for supporting soil fertility promotion in agronomic practice?

Materials and methods Study area Half of the total land area in Germany is used for agriculture (16.6 million hectares; 70 % crop production; 28.5 % permanent grassland; 1.5 % vine, fruits, and others). Between 1992 and 2021, a decreasing trend of around 1.38 million hectares was observed, mainly due to an increase in settlement and traffic areas (Statista Number of Agricultural Farms in Germany by 2021). Nearly 10 % of the agricultural area is currently farmed organically, while 90 % is farmed conventionally. The total number of farms decreased from 293,900 in 2011 to 256,900 in 2021, accompanied by a decrease in the number of farms with below 100 hectares of agricultural land and an increase in the number of farms with more than 100 hectares (Genesis Agricultural holdings and Utilised Agricultural Area).

Germany is situated in a temperate climate zone. The consequences of climate change are becoming increasingly apparent in this area: The long-term mean of annual air temperature was 8.2 ◦C in the 1961–1990 climate reference period and increased to 9.3 ◦C in the recent reference period (1991–2020) (German Meteorological Service). The long-term mean of annual precipitation was 791 mm (spring: 171 mm; summer: 240 mm; autumn: 190 mm; winter: 190 mm) in the 1991–1920 climate reference period and remained mostly stable (789 mm in the 1961–1990 reference period) with a trend towards higher interannual variability (German Meteorological Service). As observed using the Helmholtz Centre for Environmental Research drought monitor, the intra-annual precipitation distribution shows a trend towards an increase in the winter and a decrease in the summer, which results in more frequent and severe droughts during the main vegetation period for agricultural crops (Markonis et al., 2021).

Data collection and analysis The nationwide survey was conducted in winter/spring 2022 in Germany and utilized a standardized online questionnaire. The target groups were German farmers and institutionalists, such as agronomic advisors, agricultural scientists, and other stakeholders in the agricul tural sector (associations, federal institutions). Farmers and in stitutionalists with experience in the field of agronomy and soil fertility were invited to participate in the survey by direct e-mails with a per sonal letter and link to an online version of the questionnaire. The survey was also sent to agricultural and scientific associations to reach potential participants through appropriate mail distribution systems. Many ad vertisements were also placed in agricultural magazines, on the home pages of agricultural associations, and on online agricultural platforms.

In addition, potential participants were contacted directly and invited to participate. The target groups were provided with a direct link to the Q- Set internet portal.

The questionnaire was set up as follows: In the first part, participants were asked to provide personal information about their occupations. If their respective field of work was not included in the suggestions, additional responses could be added in a free-text field. In addition, farmers were asked to provide information about the on-site conditions at their farm (soil quality index or score `from 0 as lowest soil quality up M.K. Wolf et al.