--- Techen and Helming, 2017 ---

Soil Security 13 (2023) 100119 11 certain soil properties, such as trafficability. If the soil is of higher quality, the amortization of investments is not as easy to recognize, and a payoff, e.g., in yield, often requires more time and efforts.

Tillage also has a major impact on soil fertility. In this study, the respondents mainly recommended and preferred reduced tillage and conservation tillage for promoting soil fertility instead of conventional tillage practices such as ploughing. Conservation tillage has been shown to improve the physical, chemical, and biological properties of soil (Michler et al., 2019; Giller et al., 2015; Busari et al., 2015; Peign´e et al., 2018; Palm et al., 2014), including water infiltration/storage capacity and biodiversity, which were rated of high interest for climate-resilient and yield-stable cropping systems by the farmers surveyed. For this reason, conservation agriculture measures are becoming increasingly prominent. This is also reflected in the fact that 49 % of the farmers who participated in the survey already implement conservation tillage with mulch sowing on their farms. The three associated basic principles, which play important roles in the conservation agriculture system, are permanent ground cover, crop rotation diversification, and minimal soil disturbance (Busari et al., 2015). Permanent soil cover with crop resi dues or mulch primarily protects soil aggregates from mechanical destruction by raindrops (more water-stable aggregates in the upper soil layer), reducing wind and water erosion as well as evaporation (un productive water losses from the soil) (Giller et al., 2015; Busari et al., 2015; Peign´e et al., 2018; Palm et al., 2014). The absence or minimi zation of soil disturbance increases the activity and diversity of soil or ganisms. Bacteria, fungi, and especially earthworms have significant impacts on the pore system and thus on the air and water supply to plant roots (Peign´e et al., 2018; Palm et al., 2014; Techen and Helming, 2017).

All these aspects can help to increase the climate resilience of agricul tural soils and consequently yield-stable crop production as extreme weather events (heavy rainfall events, storms, drought, and heat stress) are predicted to become more frequent (V´arallyay, 2010). Despite these benefits, conservation tillage can also have some negative effects, including a higher weed pressure, soil organic carbon accumulation in the uppermost soil layer and a decrease in the deeper layers, in some cases a higher bulk density, and yield decreases in the first years of system conversion, reaching a dynamic equilibrium only after more than 10 years (Giller et al., 2015; Busari et al., 2015; Peign´e et al., 2018; Palm et al., 2014). However, conservation tillage has been scientifically proven to be advantageous in dry climates, showing its potential for use in the future in regions affected by climate change (Michler et al., 2019).

Nevertheless, it is important that long-term trials are carried out and that no blanket recommendations for measures are made, as it is essential to carry out differentiated consideration at the site and farm level beforehand. In addition, farmers are seeking greater recognition and promotion for soil-conserving tillage techniques and would like more financial and practical support in the form of recommendations and advice (as stated in comments of this survey). Only this will enable farmers to give more consideration to the promotion and maintenance of soil fertility through conservation tillage.

In contrast to soil tillage, agroforestry was one of the agronomic measures that the respondents clearly rated as having a lower impact on soil fertility, where only 2 % of farmers had integrated agroforestry systems into their operations, and only 7 % of these had seen a positive impact on the promotion of soil fertility. Agroforestry is considered to have a positive impact on soil-related ecological services and soil fertility as it results in improved physical, chemical, and biological soil properties (e.g., buffers moisture, enhances biodiversity, and reduces erosion) while also providing food, wood, and fodder (Fahad et al., 2022; Jose, 2009; Wilson and Lovell, 2016). Thus, agroforestry is a way to decrease risk for farmers through the growth and use of multiple products to generate short-term as well as long-term income streams.

However, the high investment costs, delayed gains, and large amounts of time and knowledge required for management discourage many farmers from adopting agroforestry practices (Wilson and Lovell, 2016). In addition to a lack of farmer experience and a lack of demonstrations or on-farm trials, conversion to agroforestry involves permanent land al terations and has legal and economic implications. An equally important issue for farmers is the regulatory space for agroforestry systems.

However, agroforestry systems will be eligible for funding through the German agricultural policy from 2023 forward, which could signifi cantly change farmers’ attitudes and interest towards their on-farm implementation.

The impact of biostimulants or soil amendments, such as biochar, was considered to be extremely small, resulting in low levels of recommendation and implementation for these practices by farmers as well as institutionalists in this study. This result clearly contradicts the goals of the EU Commission and the German government to achieve drastic reductions in the use of chemical-synthetic fertilisers and pesti cides (especially glyphosate) through, i.a., biologicals (biocontrol), soil additives, and biostimulants. The aim is to use these kinds of bio-based products to increase soil quality, crop productivity, tolerance to biotic/ abiotic stresses, and the effective use of water and nutrient resources (Van Oosten et al., 2017; Abhilash et al., 2016; Franzoni et al., 2022).

Despite the growing economic sector and the fact that biostimulants are being used in agricultural practice more frequently, it is clear from this survey that neither German farmers nor agricultural institutionalists give high value to these agronomic management measures thus far.

Reasons for this could be a lack of valid information and personal on-farm experiences, as the comments of respondents indicated a de mand for more scientific research on biostimulants/soil amendments as well as reliable recommendations for their on-farm application and the fast transfer of knowledge from research to agronomic practice. Many of the complex interactions between biostimulants/soil amendments and the agronomic system (’soil x climate x crop’) have still not been clari fied. These gaps in knowledge, poor shelf life (e.g., microbial-based biostimulants), and susceptibility to photo-, thermo-, hydro-, and bio lability could be further reasons for the low appreciation and application of these substances thus far (Van Oosten et al., 2017; Abhilash et al., 2016; Franzoni et al., 2022; Rouphael et al., 2015). To characterize these biological agents for farmers and to allow them to integrate these tools into practice, collaboration between scientists, farmers, and industry is required.

Conclusions In farming practice there is a high awareness of the importance of soil fertility for climate-resilient and yield-stable cropping systems, especially when considering the increasing production risk due to ongoing climate change. Based on the survey results, our five initial research questions can be answered as follows: (1) Soil fertility for agricultural crop production was rated as being of high to very high importance now and even more so in the future. (2) The main motives for agronomic investments in greater soil fertility were improving the climate resilience and yield stability of cropping systems. (3) The main soil properties of interest that were expected to be improved with greater soil fertility were water storage capacity, rootability, biological activity, and water infiltration rate. (4) The three highest ranked agronomic management practices with the greatest estimated positive impact on soil fertility were catch cropping, diversified crop rotations with a positive humus bal ance, and year-round soil cover. (5) For future improvement, in terms of supporting the promotion of soil fertility in farming practice, simple indicators and reference values for assessing soil fertility as well as ’workshops, field days and field schools’ for training aspects are required.

In terms of methods for the assessment of soil fertility, soil structure analyses, biological indicators, yield/biomass production, soil nutrient analyses, and field methods were found to be the most important, M.K. Wolf et al.