--- How Do We Achieve ---

Page 2 ATTRA Sustainable Agriculture: An Introduction on imported oil, and driven more and more acres into the hands of fewer and fewer “farmers,” crippling rural communities.

In recent decades, sustainable farmers and researchers around the world have responded to the extractive industrial model with ecol ogy-based approaches, variously called natu ral, organic, low-input, alternative, regenera tive, holistic, Biodynamic, biointensive, and biological farming systems. All of them, rep resenting thousands of farms, have contrib uted to our understanding of what sustain able systems are, and each of them shares a vision of “farming with nature,” an agro- ecology that promotes biodiversity, recycles plant nutrients, protects soil from erosion, conserves and protects water, uses mini mum tillage, and integrates crop and live stock enterprises on the farm.

But no matter how elegant the system or how accomplished the farmer, no agriculture is sustainable if it’s not also proﬁtable, able to provide a healthy family income and a good quality of life. Sustainable practices lend themselves to smaller, family-scale farms.

These farms, in turn, tend to ﬁnd their best niches in local markets, within local food sys tems, often selling directly to consumers. As alternatives to industrial agriculture evolve, so must their markets and the farmers who serve them. Creating and serving new mar kets remains one of the key challenges for sustainable agriculture.

How Do We Achieve Sustainability?

Farmers and other agricultural thinkers have established a strong set of guiding principles for sustainability, based on stewardship and economic justice. Producers and researchers are annually increasing the pace of improve ments in agro-ecology systems, making them more efﬁcient and proﬁtable. More Coopera tive Extension ofﬁces and colleges of agricul ture are endorsing sustainable practices. And every year more farmers are seeing the wis dom and rewards—both economic and per sonal—in these systems. (Organic products are the fastest growing grocery segment in the United States.) Little by little—one crop, one ﬁeld, one family at a time—sustainable farming is taking root.

Off the farm, consumers and grassroots activ ists are working to create local markets and farm policies that support sustainable prac tices. They are working to raise consumers’ awareness about how their food is grown and processed—how plants, animals, the soil, and the water are treated. And they are working to forge stronger bonds between producers and consumers that will, in time, cement the foundations of locally and regionally self- sufﬁcient food systems. In contrast to mono- cropped industrial megafarms that ship throughout the world, the vision of sustain able agriculture’s futurists is small to mid- size diversiﬁed farms supplying the majority of their region’s food. (No one in Idaho has to give up orange juice, and there will still be cranberries in California for Thanksgiv ing.) Listed below are some of the key consider ations for making a farm more sustainable, along with relevant ATTRA publications in those areas. Because each farm is differ ent, there’s no single formula for sustainable success, but these principles and publica tions are good places to begin learning what Jam processed on-farm is one example of a value- added product. Photo by Nathalie Dulex.

L ittle by little—one crop, one ﬁeld, one family at a time—sustain able farming is taking root.