--- Did You Know? ---

BG-12.11 Sustainable Agriculture Did You Know? ■ ■Agriculture is a basic human endeavour. It developed independently on every continent with human habitation (except Australia). ■ ■By 5000 years ago, the majority of people living on Earth had made the transition from eating mostly wild foods to eating mainly domesticated ones. Today there are very few people that rely on hunting and/or gathering for the majority of their food; the world now relies on agricultural production for almost all of its food needs. ■ ■The New World staple crops of maize and potatoes produced twice the calories per acre when compared with the Old World staples of wheat and barley, while the Old World cereal crops were an ideal match for the growing conditions of the South American Pampas and the North American prairies. Although agriculture developed independently at numerous sites worldwide, it has now become one big system that covers much of the planet. ■ ■Agricultural practices may not achieve a completely neutral environmental impact.

Despite improvements in sustainability and increased protection of the natural resources involved, agriculture may still have a negative impact on the health of the planet (but this doesn’t mean that humans will stop producing food—the first priority for civilizations). ■ ■There are a wide range of farms worked, commodities created, and agricultural production practices employed in Manitoba and globally, and each will have a different environmental footprint. The sustainability of a farm’s production practices depend partially on the regenerative power of the land/ ecosystem it is situated on/in. Because of this, each situation must be treated individually with regards to sustainability (there is no one right solution for improving sustainability for all farms). ■ ■Both McDonald’s and the UN’s FAO have been working on developing criteria to assess the sustainability of agricultural production. ■ ■Agroecology is the science of applying ecological concepts and principles to the design and management of sustainable food systems. It is seen by many as the key to future agricultural sustainability because it addresses issues such as poverty, climate change, and food insecurity. (FAO, Nov 2016) Agroecology uses ecological theory to design individualized food systems that address the following: ■ ■agriculture community ecology (soils, plants, animals, markets) ■ ■nutritional ecology ■ ■human ecology DYk?