--- Making a Difference ---

BG-12.14 Sustainable Agriculture Making a Difference How do consumers have an impact on production practices in agriculture? “Eating is an agricultural act.” – Wendell Berry Manitoba egg producers respond to consumer desires and values with a variety of whole egg products.

Look at the shelves of eggs in any supermarket/grocery store and you will notice there are six main choices (beyond size and shell colour) that are available to consumers. The first four describe differences in the hens’ housing. The first five have the same nutritional profiles. ■ ■“Classic” (i.e., traditional cage-laid eggs): This system, which replaced open cage-free systems to improve hen welfare and farmer care, is the least expensive option and the production system that is most commonly used on Manitoba farms. It involves small flocks of hens living together in plain cages. ■ ■Enriched systems/nest-laid eggs: This system features larger cages (more room per hen) and includes features to encourage natural chicken behaviour (e.g., a perch system, scratch pads, a private area for laying eggs, etc.). ■ ■Free-range systems: Free-range systems have no cages. Large numbers of hens live together in indoor barns, their food and water is available freely, and there are nest boxes along the perimeter for hens to lay their eggs. Chickens have access to the outdoors when weather conditions allow.

There are few free-range egg production systems in Manitoba due to our cold winters. ■ ■Organic: In this system, the hens that lay the eggs were fed organic feed. ■ ■Omega-3 eggs: Omega-3 eggs are the only eggs with any nutritional difference, as they have been fortified with two different omega-3 fatty acids: DHA (docosahexaenoic acid) and ALA (alpha linolenic acid). These acids have been linked with the proper development and maintenance of brain cells. This is accomplished by feeding the hens flaxseed.

The Egg Farmers of Manitoba organization watches egg sales closely to determine consumer trends, and it works with the egg producers of the province to meet consumer needs. If one of the previously listed egg types begins to become more popular with consumers, farmers are encouraged to adopt the new production style. In this way, consumers have a direct influence on the production practices of Manitoba egg farmers when they choose a type of egg at the supermarket.

This choice at the food purchasing level can also extend into other production systems that have a greater impact on sustainability. (Look at the differences in sustainability of two different production systems: beef from feed lots versus grass-fed beef).