--- in 1918 gave Canada’s Department of Indian ---

BG-12.10 Sustainable Agriculture Essential Questions ■ ■What is the proper use of land? In the past, hunter-gatherer food systems have been viewed as inferior to agriculture. This reasoning was used as a claim for acquiring Indigenous land for agricultural purposes in Canada.

Because it was perceived that Indigenous occupants were not making full use of their treaty land, amendments to the Indian Act in 1918 gave Canada’s Department of Indian Affairs the power to lease or give band land to non-Indigenous people for the purpose of cultivation. ■ ■How can farmers increase agricultural production and protect the natural resources they are dependent on while improving sustainability? (Note: Agriculture produces more than just food for people; it also produces fuel, fibre, and feed.) ■ ■What is the role of the urban consumer in improving agricultural sustainability? Urban issues include the following:

Q Q Informed decision making in food purchases Q Q Excessive food waste Q Q Proper recycling of nutrients found in agricultural products (how to recycle nutrients back into the agriculture system) ■ ■What are the connections among agricultural sustainability, food safety, and food security? (Understand how these ideas are interrelated, yet completely different.) ■ ■What is done in the short term to address food security must not undermine the long-term objectives of food production and natural resource sustainability. ■ ■Countries that engage in food trade must balance their needs for food security against other nations’ needs for security and sustainability. ■ ■Is access to food and freedom from hunger a basic human right? What would food systems look like if this right were extended to all people? What would that mean for producers and consumers? What would have to change in our current food system?

How can the sustainability of various agriculture production practices and systems be evaluated?

What criteria should be included? What scale should be used? How much of the food system should be evaluated? (Look at the criteria developed by McDonald’s for its Sustainable Beef Verification Program and compare this with the 10 challenge areas created by the FAO for improving agricultural sustainability.) ?