--- Sustaining Maine’s Potato Farms Using Alternative Crop Rotations ---

www.sare.org SARE 2023/2024 REPORT FROM THE FIELD 11 NORTHEAST SARE This project highlighted several viable crop options that have the potential to diversify potato cropping systems in Maine. Some of the crops trialed in this project failed to gain traction due to limited market access while some, specifically mustard, field peas and sunflowers, were successful and remain in production in Maine today.

Jake Dyer, Maine Potato Board THE CHALLENGE Potato growers in Maine face challenges when developing sustainable crop rota- tions due to short growing seasons and labor scarcity. And while the ecological benefits of crop rotation are well known, potato producers often struggle to find reliable markets for the small-grain crops, such as oats and barley, that are rotated with potatoes. Though previous research suggests that a variety of highly market- able pulse and oilseed crops can perform Crops that have the potential to diversify potato production include (from left) sunflowers, yellow field peas, condiment mustard (top) and red lentils (bottom). Photos by Jake Dyer, Maine Potato Board Sustaining Maine’s Potato Farms Using Alternative Crop Rotations well in Maine’s challenging climate, not enough information exists on regional best management practices. These crops can not only be an income driver for the producer, but rotating potatoes with pulses and oil- seed crops may also decrease the need for inputs, break pest cycles, reduce erosion and compaction, and add value by filling market demands.

THE ACTIONS TAKEN Supported by a SARE Research and Education grant, Jake Dyer, an agronomist with the Maine Potato Board, evaluated the potential of rotating potatoes with more lucrative crops such as oilseeds and pulses.

Research was conducted across several host farms during the 2018 and 2019 grow- ing seasons. In the first year of the study they evaluated crops like field peas, sun- flowers, canola and mustard in different growing conditions to determine their per- formance, strengths and weaknesses. The most-promising crops from the initial trials were studied on a larger scale in 2019, with sunflowers, canola, field peas and condi- ment mustard performing and selling well.

THE IMPACTS The team’s research shows great promise for the adoption of these crops within Maine’s potato production systems.

Specific impacts include: • Improved yields: Field peas and canola demonstrated increased yields while requiring minimal fertility and few chem- ical inputs. • Cost savings: Second-year research on field peas showed that fertilizer, seed treatments and foliar fungicides did not significantly increase yields, saving farm- ers around $60 an acre. • Best practices: Two years of field research provided valuable insights into alternative crop production, paving the way for future crop diversification, more sustainable farming practices and new revenue streams.

Learn more: See the related SARE project LNE17-358.