--- Wako Pure Chemical Ind. Ltd. (Tokyo, Japan). High-performance liquid chromatography ---

3

Switzerland) for approximately 1 min. Next, the sample tube washed the homogenizer
blade with 5 mL of 3% (w/v) pyrogallol/EtOH. After adding 2.0 mL of a 60% (w/v)
potassium hydroxide (KOH) solution to the tube, the mixture was heated at 70°C for 30
min to achieve saponification. After cooling at room temperature, the mixture was divided
into two plastic centrifuge tubes (50 mL). Then, 22.5 mL of a 1% (w/v) NaCl solution and
15 mL of hexane/ethyl acetate (9/1) were added to each tube, and carotenoids were
extracted by shaking for 10 min. After centrifugation at 3500 rpm for 10 min, the upper
layer was collected. Subsequently, 15 mL of hexane/ethyl acetate (9/1) was added to the
tube containing the lower layer, and the extraction procedure (i.e., shaking and
centrifugation) was performed again. The combined upper layer containing carotenoids
was poured into a round-bottom flask, and the solvent was removed by evaporation using
a rotary evaporator. Next, hexane/ethyl acetate (9/1) was added to dissolve the residue, and
the mixture was transferred to a 10 ml measuring flask. The sample volume was then
appropriately adjusted by adding hexane/ethyl acetate (9/1). The carrot extract solutions
were stored at -80°C until HPLC analysis.
Lycopene, alpha-carotene, beta-carotene, and canthaxanthin standards for HPLC analysis
originally produced by CaroteNature GmbH (Bern, Switzerland) were purchased from
Wako Pure Chemical Ind. Ltd. (Tokyo, Japan). High-performance liquid chromatography
(HPLC)-grade ethanol (EtOH), methanol (MeOH), and chloroform were provided by
Wako Pure Chemical Ind. Ltd. (Tokyo, Japan). The other reagents and solvents used for
carotenoid extraction and HPLC analysis were of analytical grade.
An aliquot (1.0 mL) of the extracted sample solution was filtered through a GL
Chromatographic Disc 4P, 0.45 μm (GL Sciences Inc., Tokyo, Japan), to remove very
small dust particles and insoluble matter, and the filtrate was dried using a centrifugal
concentrator. The residue was resolved in 1000 μL of chloroform, and an aliquot (500 μL)
was dried using a centrifugal concentrator. Thereafter, the residue was redissolved in 100
μL of chloroform, and an aliquot (90 μL) was mixed with 10 μL of canthaxanthin (0.1
mg/mL), employed as the internal standard material for the present HPLC procedure to
avoid any change in solvent volume during autosampler injection, and allow it to be
corrected.
The HPLC equipment consisted of a HITACHI-HPLC system (Hitachi High-Tech
Corporation, Tokyo, Japan) containing a pump, UV–VIS detector, column oven, and
autosampler for sample injection. The employed HPLC procedure was similar to protocols
described in the application sheets (LT028 and LT073) of GL Sciences Inc. (Tokyo, Japan).
Analyses were performed in an Inertsil ODS-3 column (3 μm, 2.1 mm × 100 mm, GL
Sciences Inc., Tokyo, Japan) with the mobile phase described below applied at a 0.2
mL/min flow rate. The mobile phase was a mixture of MeOH and EtOH (45/55). The
column oven temperature, UV–VIS detector wavelength, and injection volume were 50°C,
455 nm, and 10 μL, respectively. Under these HPLC analysis conditions, the carotenoid
peaks of the carrot samples were well separated. The amount of each carotenoid (i.e.,
lycopene, alpha-carotene, or beta-carotene) was calculated from the difference in the peak
area ratios of an extract sample and a standard sample. The data were corrected based on
the recovery of canthaxanthin (the internal standard).

DPPH radical-scavenging assay