--- O were confirmed. In ---

(Joller et al., 2020). Although DMDS is a soil fumigant
that controls soil-borne pathogens and nematodes, it
has been pointed out that it may not function depending
on the microbial environment of the soil (Dangi et al.,
2014). In addition, some Paenibacillus strains are
known to have a defensive effect on nematodes 51,52. In
fact, the thermophile-fermented compost used in this
experiment was less likely to cause nematode damage
in another field test and made it difficult to form root
knots as a detriment (Fig. S14). These results appeared
to be different from those involving nematodes already
reported 53, although under the other experimental
conditions. Nevertheless, the commonalities here may
confirm a novel aspect of the defense against root-knot
nematode damage using the Paenibacillus-harboring
compost in the structural equation.
As previously reported, the 16SrRNA sequence of the
genus Paenibacillus was one of the bacterial genera
once was found in compost 19. In this study, two strains
of Paenibacillus spp. from compost were newly isolated
as nitrogen-fixing bacteria. Genome data was consistent
with the structural equations and production results in
this experiment, although not all. Except for the genes
for nitrogen fixation, auxin production, phosphate
solubilization, siderophore reaction, and related function,
genes related to GABA and/or isopropylmalate
production (Table S9) were notable. GABA plays a
crucial role in plant drought tolerance 54 and pathogen
and insect attacks 55 and has been suggested to play a
vital role in nitrogen fixation in seagrass 56, even though
it is not a terrestrial plant. 2-Isopropylmalate synthase
(IPMS) is involved in the synthesis of 2-isopropylmalate
57. Notably, IPMS is involved in the biosynthesis of the
amino acid leucine 58 and flavor compounds in apple.
Although the plant species are different, they do not
contradict the results in this study. In any case, although
GABA was detected in plants, the abundance of GABA
in the soil was extremely low. Furthermore, the
abundance of 2-isopropylmalate in the soil was also
extremely low, resulting in difficult discussions based on
concentration in the soil.
The
identical
relationship
between
the
genus
Paenibacillus detected in soil omics analysis (Fig. 3c)
and isolated Paenibacillus strains derived from compost
(Table 1) should be confirmed by mash distance
analysis (Fig. S11). Unfortunately, it was impossible to
verify that the isolated Paenibacillus strains from the
compost were consistent with the sequences detected
in the carrot soil. However, it was interesting that the
abundance of bacteria belonging to the genus
Paenibacillus found in compost also increased in
compost-treated soil. Quorum sensing is commonly
defined as a signaling network between bacteria that
regulates their function as a bacterial group depending
on the density of a given species 59, and notably, known
species belonging to Paenibacillus 60 and Bacillus 61
carry quorum sensing genes. Thus, it may be suggested
that this mechanism might contribute to plant growth and
that closely related Paenibacillus species detected in
the soil from the carrot experiment play a role in the
whole group of genus.
This study evaluated the impact of Paenibacillus-
harboring compost on the nitrogen cycle in the soil, which
cannot be carried out in field trials. As a result, nitrogen
fixation capacity and reduction in N2O were confirmed. In
recent years, it has been suggested that Paenibacillus
polymyxa may be involved in the suppression of N2O
generation62, but the results of this study confirmed the
effect of the compost itself. The N2O in the soil is
generated by cytochrome P450 derived from fungi 63,64,
which is often a pathogen of soil origin. Notably, a
bacterium producing cyclic lipopeptides that suppress
growth in fungi 19 was also present in the compost used
in
this
experiment.
Thus,
thermophile-fermented
compost is expected to be one of the potential candidates
for ecological biostimulants. Following this research, it
should be necessary to explore the conditions under
which compost can be used more efficiently.
Fig. 6 shows an inference model obtained from the
results of this survey. It shows that the introduction of
compost along with Paenibacillus affects the nitrogen
cycle of the soil and the plant body inherent in the soil.
Expressly, the model assumes that nitrogen fixation and
associated suppression of nitrous oxide production occur
in the soil and that the absorption of phosphate, iron, and
nicotinamide, which are plant nutrient sources, is
enhanced. As a result, increases or decreases in amino
acids, flavonoids, and carotenoids involved in the
nitrogen cycle would be expected to be affected.
Furthermore, an environmentally friendly mechanism is
assumed by increasing the content of S-methyl L-
cysteine, which has antipathogenic properties.
There is a global need for sustainable organic farming. In
this study, compost fermented at high temperatures was
used as a model organic fertilizer. Integrated omics
analyses were conducted using carrots as a crop model,
allowing easy analysis of the portions above and below
the ground. Based on the characteristics of omics data,
SEM estimated the optimal models that the compost itself
and/or
the
influenced
rhizosphere
improve
the
productivity and quality of the crop and environmental
conditions, such as nitrogen fixation and denitrification
with reduced greenhouse gases. These statistical
inferences provide a novel perspective on the potential
use of sustainable compost.

Acknowledgments Special thanks to Mr. Shigeo
Enomoto and the Miyakoji farm members (Miyakojino
Tamago Co., Ltd. and Miyakoji Farm Co., Ltd.) for their
appropriate advice and preparation of the experimental
fields. We are also grateful to Eri Ochiai for the data
arrangement, Sanyo Trading Co., Ltd., for the N2O
measurements, Naoko Tachibana (RIKEN IMS) for
preparing the samples, and Mr. Toru Harada (Harada
Agrobusiness Co., Ltd.) and Mr. Yuji Katayama (Econet
Co., Ltd.) for cucumber field management and providing
photos
of
nematode-damaged
and
nondamaged
cucumber.