--- Structural Equation modeling (SEM) ---

Above ground Under ground Target sites Color Taste Growth Metabolite indicies in leaf and root Metablolite- and Microbiota-indicies in soil Omics analysis Production and Quality Amendment with thermophile -fermented compost A model of organic fertilizer Build-up of model candidates based on Correlation and Association analyses Structural Equation modeling (SEM) Inferrence of bacteria candidate for nitrogen cycle Genome analysis of the isolates In vitro experiments Experimental procedure for connecting laboratory-level and field-level tests with structural equations BayesLiNGAM Verification of importance of estimated structure Root vegetable model Estimation of agroecological effects Fig. S1 Experimental scheme in this study. As a model of organic fertilizer, thermophile fermented compost was used, and as a crop model, carrots, which are easy to analyze both above and below the ground, were targeted. The leaves and roots, as well as soil metabolites, were analyzed, and the soil flora was analyzed to evaluate its relationships with growth, color, and taste as agricultural quality indices. These relationships were evaluated by correlation and association analysis, hypotheses were made, and a structural equation modeling (SEM) was constructed. Since one of the bacterial candidates for nitrogen cycle was selected from the structural equation for the soil, the candidate bacteria were isolated, and their genomes were analyzed. Nitrogen fixation and suppression of nitrous oxide (N2O) generation was also analyzed at the laboratory level. An analysis of the suppression of N2O generation, which is difficult to perform in the field, was conducted in the laboratory. This study was performed using a procedure that connects laboratory-level and field-level tests with SEM to support experiments that cannot be conducted. In addition, causal mediation analysis (CMA) and BayesLiNGAM verified the importance as a group of optimal model candidates estimated by SEM.

Based on these observations, a model for the agroecological effects of compost was estimated.

Causal Mediation Analysis (CMA) A B C D E Estimation of the function of the nitrogen cycle and related reaction