--- Technology Agency (JST) and the Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA). ---

Agronomy 2020, 10, 605 13 of 16 of growing seeding to cover the entire soil surface irrespective of inter-row plant spacing. This method does not only prevent water loss through evaporation from the soil surface but suppress weed growth below the agrimats as they act as a ﬁrm protective soil cover. Onwona-Agyeman et al. [13] states that “The use of agrimats as mulch could reduce weed growth from 0.5 tons/ha/month to 0.05 ton/ha/month”. Moreover, “agrimats absorb and retain more moisture (about 70%) for up to 24 h”.

Despite all the beneﬁts highlighted in this communication, one of the most important factors that is likely to inﬂuence the adoption of the agrimats is the economic viability of using agrimats versus prevailing practices. Extensive feasibility studies with the active participation of smallholder farmers still needs to be done to ascertain the costs of purchasing the agrimats and whether farmers are willing to take up this technology. 4. Conclusions Soil erosion is a global phenomenon that negatively aﬀects human health and environmental quality more especially in semi-arid regions. The combination of CA principles can eﬀectively improve soil quality; enhance food production and food security with little or no detrimental eﬀects on the environment and human health. No till is an eﬀective strategy in CA that helps to maintain organic carbon and carbon sequestered in the soil and ultimately reduce the negative impacts of climate change. Most importantly, mulching is a practice that maintains and improves soil organic matter in the soil especially under CA systems. Although many farmers resort to maximizing proﬁt by selling crop residues, or using them as livestock feed instead of leaving or applying them as mulch for soil organic matter improvements, the ﬁndings of this communication indicate that agrimat mulch could be employed by poor resource smallholder farmers as an alternative to their valuable crop residues.

Agrimats are an innovative, sustainable and permanent soil cover mulching technology that promise to be a cost-eﬀective option, which can be used to eliminate crop residue competition in the mixed crop-livestock systems since they are manufactured from freely available biological materials. In addition, agrimats eliminate, for smallholder farmers, the heavy burden of weed control and herbicide use when no tillage is employed and they reduce the cost of irrigation more especially in semi-arid areas where rainfall is scanty. However, more extensive research needs to be conducted to investigate several aspects of the agrimats for agricultural use and their eﬃciency over traditional mulching methods mostly in terms of cost eﬀectiveness or economic viability, and to quantify the extent to which they can (i) improve soil quality (soil physical, chemical, and biological properties), (ii) enhance crop productivity (crop growth and biomass yields) in a sustainable manner and (iii) mitigate global food security especially for poor resource smallholder farmers in semi-arid or arid regions In addressing crop productivity and food security while preserving the resource base with minimal eﬀects on the environment, the conclusions and recommendations drawn from all future agrimat research work must be site-speciﬁc and should strictly be used as a guide for areas with similar soils and environmental/climatic conditions where the results will be obtained. Generally, global food security can be achieved by increasing agronomic productivity from existing land without any conversion of natural land to agroecosystems through eco-intensiﬁcation and restoration of soil health. This includes the restoration of degraded lands through the incorporation of agrimats to CA systems, which employ biological nitrogen-ﬁxing legumes in a rotation with other crops.

Author Contributions: S.M. gathered literature and wrote the original draft, A.D.N., I.I.C.W. and F.N.M. conceptualized the idea and revised the draft manuscript. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.

Funding: This research was funded by the Department of Science and Technology (DST), the Japan Science and Technology Agency (JST) and the Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA).

Acknowledgments: The authors would like to thank DST and JST for funding this communication.

Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.