--- Page 213 ---

Over-exploitation of water resources in certain regions is damaging ecosystems by reducing water flows in rivers and wetlands. Groundwater use by irri- gators is above recharge rates in some regions, which is also undermining the economic viability of farming in affected regions. Government support for irrigators is widespread and can aggravate the overuse of water and act as a disincentive to efficient water use.There is also a low uptake of water-efficient irrigation tech- nologies and poor maintenance of irrigation infra- structure, which in turn leads to the waste of water across many OECD countries. – Soil erosion.There has been a large reduction in areas of moderate to severe erosion risk. This is associated with the growing adoption of soil conservation prac- tices, such as low or no soil tillage, the requirement in some OECD countries to maintain green cover during winter, and a reduction in cultivation of fragile soils.

The costs associated with off-farm soil erosion are high in some regions, and involve treating drinking water, dredging rivers and improving aquatic ecosys- tems. – Water pollution. Agricultural sources of pollution in OECD countries have on average declined slightly, linked to reductions in nutrient surplus and pesticide use. But absolute pollutant levels are significant in many regions, and in some regions, farming’s share of nutrient-water pollution has risen, as other pollution sources have decreased more rapidly in other indus- tries.The cost associated with treating drinking water to remove nutrients and pesticides and improve aquatic environments is significant in many countries. – Air pollution. Pollutants from agriculture account for a relatively small share of total OECD acidifying emis- sions (25 per cent),use of ozone depleting substances (five per cent), and greenhouse gases (nine per cent).

Agricultural ammonia emissions (from livestock and fertilizers) decreased by 35 per cent between 1990 and 2003, but less rapidly than acidifying emissions from other sources. Some countries will need to Sustainable Agriculture – From Common Principles to Common Practice 200