--- Page 35 ---

related to climate change, water resources, land quality, agricultural bio- diversity and a range of other interacting problems.

While each of these trends has significant impacts on agri-sustainability in their own right, cumulative impacts are of greater concern.These are harder to foresee and avoid. Sustainable agriculture is not agriculture without risk, which would be unrealistic to expect.It is agriculture that is able to manage risk and maintain its resilience in the face of change and inevitable surprise. Farmers are traditionally resourceful and resilient, but the sustainability of the supply chain increasingly depends also on the ability of other actors to recognize and adapt to emerging challenges.

The connection between the increasing vulnerability and complexity of the sector and the vision of INFASA is surprisingly straightforward.

Managing risk and navigating the path to sustainability requires strong evidence that can be used for credible diagnosis and effective adapta- tion. Being able to anticipate and diagnose risk and potential for unsus- tainability requires measurement tools, processes and institutions that create and use credible tools well.

As evidenced by those participating in the INFASA Symposium, techno- logical innovation and an increasing focus on agri-sustainability indica- tors is growing in the research and policy community.There is, however, significantly more we can do. We can begin by widening our audience to the unconverted. We can also work together to shift the focus of measurement tools from research and pilot projects towards more widespread and systematic implementation.

The underlying premise of INFASA is that current measurement tools, processes and institutions involved in assessing sustainability in agricul- ture are often not well suited to the task. Market prices, for instance, often do not capture long term environmental risk, nor to they include mount- ing social stressors,fiscal or otherwise,on farm families.Data availability for key indicators are often poor or don’t cover all areas of the world, particu- larly developing countries.We don’t know how to affectively combine data from science-based monitoring and farmer or indigenous observations, the latter of which are based on generations-old knowledge of the land.

Because these factors matter for agricultural sustainability, we need to more widely introduce the measurement tools and mechanisms for which there are already many examples. I think the farming community is ready for this,as are many in agri-business and government.

INFASA may also have the potential to help us move beyond the status quo by clarifying the role of measurement tools in policy processes and Sustainable Agriculture – From Common Principles to Common Practice 22