--- Page 204 ---

Introduction Governments in OECD—and several non-OECD—countries have been increasingly interested in tracking the environmental performance of agriculture,identifying possible future environmental problems associat- ed with agricultural activities,and trying to better understand the effects of different agricultural policy measures on the environment. More recently, there is heightened concern over the effect of external envi- ronmental events—in particular climate change and variability risks— on the agricultural sector.

Agriculture exerts a major influence on the environment. Overall, across the OECD area,agriculture uses roughly 40 per cent of available land and 45 per cent of water resources. It is a major source of water pollution from nutrient and pesticide run-off. It has a significant impact on biodi- versity and shapes the landscape. It creates greenhouse gas emissions but also acts as a carbon sink. In short, agriculture has a complex rela- tionship with the environment as user and polluter of natural resources, and as provider of ecosystem and cultural landscapes.

Agriculture is a sector in which policy plays a significant role in most OECD countries. Agricultural policies provide monetary transfers that influence—directly or indirectly—what and how much to produce and where and under what conditions. Environmental regulations require farmers—either at their own cost or with the aid of subsidies—to adopt certain practices or deliver particular outcomes determined by govern- ments. The overall set of policies leads to a complex web of incentives and disincentives facing farmers,with an equally complex set of multiple environmental effects.

This paper examines the evolution of agri-environmental indicators (AEI), what has been accomplished to date on developing AEIs, the changing agri-environmental policy environment, and some thoughts on how AEIs might adapt to that changing policy environment in the future.

Evolution of agri-environmental indicators OECD work on developing agri-environmental indicators (AEIs) has been underway since 1993.It has involved several expert meetings and work- Sustainable Agriculture – From Common Principles to Common Practice 191