--- model used is the Canadian Regional Agricultural Model (CRAM) (Horner ---

4. Linking agri-environmental indicator models to policy models Agri-environmental indicators (AEI) provide a historical perspective on the agriculture sector’s environmental performance. However, in order for the sector to manage its natural resources in a manner that is envi- ronmentally, socially and economically sustainable, there is a need to understand how changes to agricultural polices and programs will affect the sector’s economic and environmental outcomes and how to pro- duce outcomes that are consistent with government goals and objec- tives. Science must be harnessed in the policy development process to generate reliable quantitative information about environmental effects and support analytical tools that allow this information to be integrated into the policy decision-making process. In the present context, this involves integrating agri-environmental indicator models with policy models. Such integrated models can then be used to evaluate existing policies and programs relative to their combined economic and envi- ronmental performance, as well as to estimate or predict the economic and environmental impacts of proposed programs and policies.

Building this type of integrated modelling capacity requires a multi-dis- ciplinary approach involving both research scientists and economists.

The integrated economic/environ-mental modelling system under development at AAFC uses a policy model to estimate changes in farm resource allocations (crops and livestock) relative to a baseline level for selected scenarios.This information is then fed into AEI models to assess a suite of potential environmental outcomes (Figure 2). The economic model used is the Canadian Regional Agricultural Model (CRAM) (Horner et al.,1992).It is capable of estimating the change in resource allocations for various crop and livestock activities in response to changes in tech- nology, government programs and policies or market conditions.

This integrated economic/environmental modelling approach was used extensively in the context of analyzing possible strategies in the devel- opment of greenhouse gas (GHG) mitigation programs for agriculture (Kulshreshtha et al., 2002; National Climate Change Secretariat- Agriculture and Agri-Food Table, 2000). Results from this integrated eco- nomic/environmental analysis of GHG mitigation options for agriculture were actually instrumental in getting agricultural soil sinks accepted under the Kyoto Protocol.

Sustainable Agriculture – From Common Principles to Common Practice 181