--- Page 152 ---

the land under tea cultivation is inflation neutral or even gains in value over the long-term. Interestingly enough, after setting the ROI rate to zero only four farms still accounted for a critical economic loss.

Farmers often ignore ROI and sometimes do so for good reasons. More important to them is to get a decent remuneration from tea production.

The demand for land, which leads to high prices per hectare, indicates that there must be several advantages to invest in land.One reason may be that a tea plantation generates a regular income and in the long run will allow a reasonable standard of living. For tea farmers prestige may also play an important role.To achieve higher status in society,one needs to increase the size of the farm.

Minimum salary A factor that needs to be defined for the RISE analysis is the minimum salary per year per household (family with two children) which allows for a life of dignity, considering minimum living standards (minimum exis- tence income) in the area where the evaluation takes place.Based on tri- angulation interviews with different tea stakeholders and independent local representatives, US$800 was used in the study as a “minimum salary” (minimum existence income) supposed as being sufficient to sus- tain a family with basic demands for a year (food, clothes, housing, hygiene, basic education and basic precautionary measures).

Furthermore,we assumed that a salary of US$270 per year would be the utmost minimum to survive (just enough food,an absolute minimum of clothes and housing).Figures 7 and 8 display the calculations of a single farm polygon based on a “minimum salary” of US$800 and US$270, respectively. Applying the realistic minimum existence income of US$800, not a single farm of the evaluated sample reached sustainable values for the indicator “Social Security” (Figure 7). Even assuming a minimum salary as low as US$270 improves the picture only marginally (Figure 8).

The slightly higher “Social Security” and “Economic Efficiency” are mis- leading because they are based on a minimum salary that only allows for bare survival of the employees.

If the farmers would pay a realistic minimum existence income (i.e., US$800) to all employees, this would of course drastically decrease the relatively high income of the farmers themselves.The big gap between potentially payable and effectively paid salaries (cf., high driving force in the indicator “working conditions”) is causing a high risk for social con- flicts. An increase of salaries is therefore not only important for the employees but also of high relevance to the processor, in view of creat- ing a more stable social and economic business background.

Sustainable Agriculture – From Common Principles to Common Practice 139