--- ., Pervanchon and Zahm ---

Introduction Tools for a holistic assessment of what are typically identified as the three main dimensions of sustainability (ecology,economy and social aspects) at the farm level have emerged as a result of the need to systematically evaluate agricultural sustainability in ways that are appealing, relevant and understandable for farmers, policy-makers and consumers alike. As is highlighted by the papers included in this section, assessment tools are increasingly developed for multiple purposes and to address cross- scale issues with a combination of sophistication and pragmatism.

The need for systemic assessment approaches that “integrate the multi- functionality of agriculture”is emphasized in Binder, et al.’s work.Such an assessment should enable the selection of indicators that can be used across scales. Binder et al. focus on trans-disciplinary processes that include an integrative model, the determination of goals through con- sensus, analysis of inter-linkages among indicators and definition of nor- mative ranges of sustainability. Further, it is highlighted that better link- ages across scales and between the ecological, social and economic dimensions are required,as Binder et al.,Häni et al.and Ochola et al.note.

Beyond monitoring the current sustainability of agricultural practices, Zahm et al. use assessment tools to perform a diagnosis; Häni et al., Ochola et al., Pervanchon and Zahm et al. provide a focal point for dia- logue; Häni et al. and Zahm et al. detect points of intervention, Häni et al. and Ochola et al. monitor policy objectives and agricultural extension; Zahm et al. provide comparisons among farm types or production prac- tices; and Ochola et al. help scope out the range of impacts of future activities.

Tools presented here range from purely qualitative approaches intended to initiate thinking about sustainability practices among farmers,such as Trame (Pervanchon, this volume), to primarily quantitative approaches based on models that are diagnostic or predictive in nature (i.e., RISE, IDEA). Visual presentation of complex information in a snapshot that is intuitive and easy to grasp is important.Pervanchon’s Sustainability Farm Tree,Häni et al.’s spider diagram of RISE,Ochola et al.’s spatial mapping or Zahm et al.’s graphical analysis of the IDEA method illustrate options ren- dering assessment results comprehensible for various stakeholders. An underlying purpose of the tools presented here is to provoke dialogue and participation among stakeholders whether by engagement in the collection of data, active interpretation of trends and dynamics, or direct implementation of responses (e.g., RISE). As Ochola’s paper demon- Sustainable Agriculture – From Common Principles to Common Practice 31