--- European Commission (2001). ---

1.Introduction In 1997, the Swiss government (Federal Council) approved a first sus- tainability strategy for Switzerland (Schweizer Bundesrat, 1997). In 1999, the Swiss people approved a new Federal Constitution, in which sus- tainability was enshrined as a guiding principle for public action in all areas.The word “sustainability” appeared in the Constitution for the first time in 1996 in the new article on agriculture.

The regulation on the evaluation of agricultural sustainability foresees that the Swiss Federal Office for Agriculture (FOAG) evaluates the eco- nomic,social and ecological situation in agriculture as well as the effects of the corresponding agricultural policies.The instruments used include monitoring indicators as well as a more restricted set of sustainability indicators.

The conceptual framework for the indicators is similar to that developed on behalf of the “Swiss Interdepartmental Committee on Sustainable Development”(Mauch Consulting, et al.,2001) and the Swiss monitoring system MONET.1 Furthermore, it is in line with work carried out by the European Commission (2001). 2. Concept The aim of sustainable development is to enable future generations to reach a welfare level that is comparable to that experienced today.

Welfare means well-being,and is based on satisfying material and imma- terial human needs.To realize these needs,certain levels of resources with defined qualities must be available to future generations. Resources in this sense include natural resources, human resources (knowledge) and reproduced resources (assets). Based on the definition of sustainable development, resources are a core element of the concept of sustain- able development.

Because the quantitative and qualitative needs of future generations are unknown,and because it is impossible to estimate how technical progress will influence resource productivity and the degree of substitution between different resources, it is impossible to foresee the quantities 1 For various publications on MONET,see:http://www.bfs.admin.ch/bfs/portal/en/index/ themen/nachhaltige_entwicklung/uebersicht/blank/publikationen.html.

Sustainable Agriculture – From Common Principles to Common Practice 157