--- Union itself down to individual regions in Member States. Regulatory ---

and tradeable water extraction rights, which have been implemented on a state/regional basis in the U.S. and Australia. Australia is developing a more market-based system for water, including the introduction of water trading across state boundaries.

Regulatory requirements Regulatory requirements play a role in addressing environmental issues in agriculture in all OECD countries.Some of these requirements are specific only to agriculture, while others are part of broader national environmen- tal legislation affecting many sectors, including agriculture. Regulatory requirements tend to be less flexible than economic instruments, as they do not allow producers the freedom to determine for themselves the most appropriate ways of meeting environmental objectives. However, they also tend to minimize risk and uncertainty,and therefore constitute a vital element of environmental policy in most OECD countries, particular- ly with respect to acute environmental problems.

All OECD countries have applied legislative requirements to deal with problems relating to pollution,and the degradation and depletion of nat- ural resources. The main categories of these requirements include: the availability of certain inputs to farmers, (for example, through the registra- tion of pesticides and other agrochemicals); farm practices, (for example, the setting of limits on stock and the spreading of manure);and the appli- cation of mandatory procedures, (for example, planning or consent processes relating to land use, water extraction and the construction of livestock facilities). Regulatory requirements are also common to protect specific valuable wildlife and habitats, and to protect agriculture and the environment from damage from invasive species and new organisms.

Over the past two decades, there has been a trend towards more regu- lation and binding constraints, but not always uniformly across the whole sector—such as for large animal units in the U.S., but not small ones. A significant proportion of requirements imposed in OECD coun- tries are applied at local and regional levels.For example,in the European Union, standards are developed at a range of levels, stretching from the Union itself down to individual regions in Member States. Regulatory requirements are often applied under the framework of over-arching legislation at the national, federal (or EU-wide) level; (for example, New Zealand’s Resource Management Act (1991) tasks Regional Councils with the responsibility of environmental resource-use policy). However, while the EU Nitrate Directive, which sets a benchmark limit on nitrate Sustainable Agriculture – From Common Principles to Common Practice 208