--- Page 175 ---

ried out by the Swiss Federal Statistical Office.They were collected in this form for the first time in 2003 (see Figure 4).That year around two-thirds of farmers had received a basic education or further training. From the point of view of sustainability, the higher the proportion of farmers with the relevant training the better. As only data for 2003 are available, it is not possible to assess the trend since 1990.

The indicator for the quality of life index shows the trend in quality of life among farmers and the rest of the population, based on their personal assessments.The quality of life index is obtained by combining estimated levels of satisfaction in 12 selected areas of life and their importance (sum of the products). Data concerning the quality of life index are only available for 2005; the level for farmers is lower than among the rest of the population.This can largely be explained by the fact that farmers are clearly less satisfied than non-farmers with regard to leisure time and time available.

The indicator for labour income in comparison to the rest of the population deals with the aspect of equity in the social dimension of sustainability.

For this comparison,the income of a family labour unit is compared with the relevant salary of an employee outside the agricultural sector. Since this comparison has been made there has always been a difference between labour income in the agricultural sector and in other sectors of the economy. This difference increased between 1990 and 2004. It already increased considerably before the agricultural reforms of 1993, however, and has remained relatively constant since then (see Figure 5).

The general picture regarding the social dimension of sustainability is as follows:

Indicators Assessment Education and training ■no result Quality of life: Comparison with rest of population ■no result Labour income: Comparison with rest of population – negative 3.3. Results concerning the ecological dimension of sustainability The indicator for ecological set-aside areas shows how natural habitats are developing that help to maintain biodiversity and ensure the stabil- ity of ecosystems. Between 1993 and 2004 the total area of ecological set-aside land rose from 20,000 hectares to 116,000 hectares (see Figure Sustainable Agriculture – From Common Principles to Common Practice 162