--- Page 49 ---

Linkages and integration of indicators. Some of the authors analyzing and providing tools for assessing the sustainability of agriculture talk about the insufficiency of indicators as assessment instruments.They claim that there is an explosion of indicator lists,in which no connection among the indicators exist and which therefore are difficult to interpret (Panell and Schilizzi, 1999; Smith and McDonald, 1998). Often these indicator lists have problems with regard to: (i) representing the system and its prob- lems;(ii) including all of the three dimensions of sustainability (UBA,1997); and (iii) considering interdependencies among the indicators.

Even though the need for integration of indicators is evident,there is no convincing approach as to how these indicators can be linked in order to provide an overall picture of how changes of an indicator in,for exam- ple, the social area, might affect the ecological area (Wiek and Binder, 2005). A first approach in this area is provided by Gustavson et al. (1999).

They analyze the relationship among indicators using a correlation analysis. This analysis provides first insights of the interaction between indicators, and can help to reduce the number of indicators. However, the analysis is quite data intensive and no causal relationships should be derived from them. Another approach is provided by Häni et al. (2002; 2003). In the RISE assessment approach, each indicator is composed of several values leading to a state and a driving force parameter for each indicator. Changes in the underlying values might affect several param- eters and,thus,several indicators.However,also in this approach,the rela- tionship among the indicators is not explicitly considered.

Assessment of sustainability. Even when indicators are selected and measured, one question remains open. Is the agricultural system at the studied scale sustainable or not? Morse et al. (2001) discuss the assess- ment problem.The information relating to whether an indicator is above or below a certain value makes it very difficult to make policy decisions because another indicator, affected by the same policy, might point to the opposite direction.They consider the possibility that looking at indi- cators by themselves can provide an entry point to the sustainability dis- cussion, but as soon as the values of the indicators have to be judged and linked to others, “objectivity” is lost, i.e., the assessment of sustain- ability has to include: (i) the inter-linkages of the indicators; and (ii) the normative criteria,i.e.,sustainability criteria and/or national goals.In addi- tion, the assessment of what is sustainable and what is not might vary across countries.

Application of the assessment results. Even though the obtained results would lead to a more sustainable agriculture at farm, regional or national level,these assessment tools have not yet been broadly applied.

Sustainable Agriculture – From Common Principles to Common Practice 36