--- of Sustainable Agriculture and Rural Development (SARD), tabled in the ---

includes direct payments since 1990 by the Swiss government, to spe- cific achievements related especially to evaluated ecological perform- ance and animal well-being.3 The food industry, which was represented at the Symposium by corpo- rations such as Nestlé and Unilever,is interested in maintaining compet- itiveness and a high quality in products, which requires demonstrably meeting minimum standards of sustainable production and often con- nected food safety issues. Besides responding to consumer preferences and regulatory expectations, the food industry is interested in assess- ment and a stronger evidence base also because it helps clarify and mit- igate the risks arising along increasingly long and complex supply chains.

As presentations at the Symposium demonstrated, there is a large and growing diversity of government, corporate and farm-level measure- ment initiatives. Innovation and experimentation is happening at differ- ent organizational levels and on multiple scales. However, despite some shared goals and objectives, coordination is limited. It is not difficult to see how the multiplicity of measurement and assessment approaches can lead to regulatory conflicts and confusion on the part of consumers, let alone the burden it puts on farmers as ultimate providers and users of information.

The need for the coordination of measurement efforts related to sus- tainable agriculture has been recognized, at least at higher organizational levels, and has lead to early initiatives such as work under the umbrella of Sustainable Agriculture and Rural Development (SARD), tabled in the early 1990s.On the international scene, organizations such as OECD and FAO play a key role. The OECD’s agri-environmental indicator program has over the years helped advance the work of several member states in this area,while FAO-coordinated efforts have focused more on the glob- al level, including developing countries. Agriculture-related indicators are also included in the generic sustainable development indicator menu prepared by the UN Division for Sustainable Development (UN–DSD).While these coordination efforts helped advance the agricul- tural sustainability measurement agenda, they have not yet resulted in common tools,methods and strategies to best use them in a wider vari- ety of settings,certainly not at the farm level and only to a limited extent at higher organizational levels. 3 Cf., contribution in this book by Bötsch, M. and Jung,V.

Sustainable Agriculture – From Common Principles to Common Practice 243