--- Page 193 ---

cised in seeking overall interpretations from the trends observed in indi- vidual indicators. Positive trends in one indicator may lead to negative trends in another.

Table 1: Description of indicator classes for risk indicators.

Classes Meaning Implication In general this level of risk is negligible. Agri-environmental health is likely to be maintained or enhanced over time.

A more detailed analysis of the situation is warranted to understand the various factors that have contributed to this rating. Potential exists to export policy/program approaches to areas of higher risk. 2 - Low risk Continued adoption of beneficial management practices to better match the limitations of the biophysical resources may improve sustainability. Specific actions not necessarily warranted. 3 - Moderate risk The trend towards or away from sustainability needs to be assessed.

More attention should be directed locally to promoting the adoption of beneficial management practices in order to better match the limitations of the biophysical resources. 4 - High risk 1 - Very low risk A more thorough local assessment is probably warranted. Additional efforts and targeted actions are likely needed locally to better match practices to the limitations of the biophysical resources. 5 - Very high risk A more thorough local assessment is warranted. Concrete and targeted actions are likely needed locally to better match practices to the limitations of the biophysical resources. It may be necessary to consider alternate land uses to reduce the risk.

Immediate attention is likely required. Under very high risk conditions, agri-environmental health is at very high risk of being significantly degraded.

Heightened concern is warranted.

Under high risk conditions, agri-environmental health is at high risk of being significantly degraded.

Awareness of the situation is important. Agri-environmental health is at moderate risk of being significantly degraded.

In many cases this level of risk may be acceptable.

Agri-environmental health is at low risk of being significantly degraded.

Sustainable Agriculture – From Common Principles to Common Practice 180