--- Page 172 ---

scope of their financial means.Finally,they have to acquire the necessary knowledge for sustainable farm management and keep it up to date.

Consumers Consumer behaviour crucially affects the degree of agriculture’s contri- bution to sustainable development. Consumers should develop a pref- erence for products from sustainable agriculture and should also be pre- pared to pay an appropriate price.

State The State has two tasks. Firstly, it must internationally defend the princi- ples of sustainable development.Secondly,it must create or preserve the basic conditions at the national level that enable agriculture to make a maximum contribution to sustainable development.

Internationally coordinated action must aim to include external costs in the end price of products and services for all sectors of the economy.Such inter- nalization is important for agriculture in two ways:firstly it decreases pressure from other industries on natural resources (air,water,soil and biodiversity) that are also used by agriculture.Secondly,it ensures that the prices of imported competitors’ products also take into account true production-, processing- and distribution costs.Therefore, the ability of Swiss agriculture to compete would improve,and the pressures on natural resources would decrease.

At the national level, the State must ensure that agricultural operators receive compensation for the provision of public goods for which no markets exist. Landscape maintenance is one example: it brings direct advantages to the present generation, but also bequeaths these bene- fits to future generations. If the internalization of external costs is not fully implemented, the cost of preserving natural resources must be compensated for through direct payments that have to be contingent on ecological cross-compliance conditions. Border protection can also contribute to the preservation of natural resources.

In addition, the State must promote both sustainable production and consumer behaviour through education and extension measures.

Efficiency The concept of sustainability requires that agriculture—like the remain- ing economy—deals efficiently with limited resources.This is also a nec- essary condition for competitiveness.

Sustainable Agriculture – From Common Principles to Common Practice 159