--- 2.1. The NAHARP program ---

beyond the farm gate by a variety of factors and stakeholders.

Governments influence decisions through the development of agricul- tural policies and programs; researchers develop new technologies for improved productivity and sustainability; and consumers influence the marketplace through their purchasing choices. Farmers, governments, researchers, environmentalists, processors and consumers are all con- cerned about ensuring the sustainability of Canada’s agriculture industry and each of these different groups can influence the outcome of this undertaking in unique ways.However,they all share a common need for environmental information. Decision-makers at all levels need objective, reliable and understandable information on the current and expected future evolution of environmental performance in the agricultural sec- tor.They need to know whether current performance is satisfactory and how it is likely to behave in response to the decisions they make. Given this type of information, decision-makers are likely to have a better understanding of the pressures they face and of the needs and oppor- tunities to change the system. The ability to communicate complex ideas in a clear and simple fashion is critical.

Historically, governments and all sectors of economic activity have invested considerable resources in promoting economic development and the use of systematic approaches and indicators to measure eco- nomic performance. These approaches have however, largely ignored environmental impacts,and the most commonly used economic indica- tors do not consider changes in the value of environmental assets and services. As a result, decision-makers who rely solely on such indicators run the risk of achieving economic goals at the expense of the environ- ment and other objectives. 2.1. The NAHARP program In 1993, in response to the need for agri-environmental information and to assess the impacts of agricultural policies on the environment, Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada began to develop a set of science- based environmental indicators specific to the agriculture and agri-food sector.In recognition of the continuing need for this kind of information, in 2003 AAFC established the National Agri-Environmental Health Analysis and Reporting Program (NAHARP). Its purpose is to strengthen departmental capacity to develop and continuously enhance Agri- Environmental Indicators (AEIs) and tools to integrate these indicators with economic and social information to assist policy development.The program uses three complementary approaches:

Sustainable Agriculture – From Common Principles to Common Practice 174