--- Principles of the Sustainable ---

Introduction Trame (meaning network in English), is a federation of four non profit associations in France which aim to share means and competences for the animation of agricultural networks.It is also a resource centre for sus- tainable development applied to farms. Its major domains of activity include: renewable energies, farmer strategy, sustainability assessment, compost on farm,territorial development,work organization,services on farm,communication and agro-equipment.Trame acts for an agriculture which contributes to sustainable development.

Principles of the Sustainable Farm Tree® of Trame The aim of the Sustainable Farm Tree® of Trame is to help farmers build a business project on farms, according to sustainable development stakes.The tree is an aid-decision tool and not a way to control farmers: it helps farmers evolve and not to be condemned.

This methodology is created for and with French farmers.

It can be used by farmers alone, but a collective use is preferable, for instance in groups under training, because it allows a mutual enrich- ment through crossed farmers’points of view over each farm system and context.

History of Sustainable Farm Tree® The Sustainable Farm Tree® is a methodology which is continuously improved as farmers continue to utilize it.

The story begins in 1997, when a farmer association of the Oise depart- ment (North Paris, France) wanted to make its members aware of the stakes of sustainable development. At that time, no tool or methodology existed in France. Therefore, farmers decided to create such a tool.

Workshops with farmers and engineers were then launched.

The first version of the Tree appears in 1999: four branches correspon- ding to four dimensions of sustainable development (reproducibility- environment, viability-economy, liveability-social aspects and transmissi- bility-transmission between generations of capital and knowledge). At Sustainable Agriculture – From Common Principles to Common Practice 113