--- with the Ministry of Agricultural Development and Food Security of Botswana, and funded by the Government of ---

44 Botswana - integrating traditional practices for CSA into crop and livestock production systems Introduction Several studies provide evidence that semi-arid Botswana is being increasingly affected by unpredictable weather connected to climate change (Nkemelang, New and Zaroug, 2018). Climate change impacts are likely to be severe for smallholder farmers whose livelihoods depend largely on natural resources (Batisani and Yarnal, 2010; Batisani, 2012). The agriculture sector is particularly vulnerable to current and future climate risks because of the low adaptive capacity of farming communities. Indeed, a lack of education and technical skills, poverty and insufficient access to assets and capital affect farmers’ ability to recover from shocks or build alternative livelihoods. Even where research institutes have developed CSA technologies and practices, farmers are minimally, if at all, involved in this development. Yet, it is crucial to involve farmers and consider indigenous knowledge in the development of climate- smart technologies and the design of resilient farming systems if the country is to attain food security in the face of climate change.

Farmers in Botswana possess traditional knowledge and are implementing CSA practices that could be scaled up by raising awareness and strengthening the capacities of national and local institutions. Due to the lack of institutional capacity, successful CSA implementation currently remains limited to isolated cases. Institution capacity building would enable these practices to be universalized. This is what the project Integrating Traditional Practices for CSA into Crop and Livestock Production Systems aims to do. The project is coordinated by FAO in close collaboration with the Ministry of Agricultural Development and Food Security of Botswana, and funded by the Government of Italy. The project brings together researchers from the Botswana University of Agriculture and Natural Resources, farmers and extension workers to develop resilient farming systems. Institutional capacities are further strengthened by training trainers (i.e. extension officers) on CSA and resilient farming systems. These extension officers then provide training to farmers on CSA practices, under the supervision of university staff.

Rationale Agriculture is a major pillar for Botswana’s drive towards economic diversification and sustainable development.

Indeed, while mineral mining currently accounts for the bulk of the country’s GDP, agriculture contributes to the livelihoods of the majority of Botswanans and is the basis for economic sustenance in rural communities. The adoption of CSA practices would allow farmers to produce decent harvests even as climate change results in a reduction in rainfall and increased heat waves. ©Koketso Mannathoko