--- Page 26 ---

16

providing crucial information on local priorities and challenges, communities’ needs and the ecosystem
values of village zones through initial diagnostic activities;

providing critical information on the local mindset, values and perceptions of spaces and seasonal priorities,
which allows FFS facilitators to adapt the learning process to local perspectives and perceptions and local
space-temporal categories;

allowing training programmes, modules and field trials to be formulated based on local knowledge on land
use, landscape, climate change, ecosystem services and adaptation strategies. 
The research contributes to CSA action point 1 (building the evidence base for CSA) and action point 5 (implementing
practices at field level). For action point 1, the results of the investigation provide evidence to determine the effects
of climate change on food production and identify potential climate-smart adaptation and mitigation options. Key
findings from the investigation that contribute to the evidence base for CSA include:

the identification of the more vulnerable zones in each village;

the identification of key ecosystem services in each village;

the identification of extreme weather events and their impact on villages (socio-economic and environmental
consequences);

stocktaking of predictors (biophysical predictors, animal behaviours and changes in vegetation) related to
the following climatic conditions: impending rains, early rain stops, coolness, the (early) start of winter,
intense heat and droughts;

stocktaking of resilient plant and animal species;

stocktaking of adaptation practices related to specific climatic conditions.
As far as action point 5 is concerned, the research helps identify suitable CSA options by incorporating local farmers’
knowledge and determining their requirements and priorities.
For each of the four case studies, data collected through focus groups provided relevant information to develop climate risk
adaptation plans at community level. Farmers provided information regarding weather and climate impacts by village zone,
ecosystem services, adaptation practices, resilient species and indicators used to predict climate events. This information
enabled the assessment of the vulnerability and potential of the community and, based on that, the development of
community adaptation plans. The case study for the village of Padaff, for example, found that one village area was suffering
from a considerable deterioration of natural resources due to river salinization and overflow; as this was compromising
important productive activities such as fishing and rice cultivation, the study argued that it was important to focus the village’s
adaptation plan on that particular area. The construction of a barrage and the creation of a flood defence zone by planting
eucalyptus trees were identified as priority actions. The following additional adaptation practices were also recommended:

using short-cycle varieties such as souna 2 or 3 millet, mélakh cowpea and different peanut varieties;

reforestation with eucalyptus and vetiver, to build flood defence zones;

fitting gabions to reduce erosion damage;

putting in fascines;

planting hedgerows (euphorbia balsamifera, jatropha curcas);

using bags filled with sand to bend the direction of water flows during erosion and flooding;

using compost, rotating crops and leaving crop residues in the field as forage (cowpea) or as mulch (millet
and corn) to enhance fertility and reduce wind erosion.
This case study was submitted by Stefano Mondovì, agricultural officer, FAO. fieldschools@dgroups.org.