--- Global – the Sustainable Rice Landscape Initiative: ---

50
Global – the Sustainable Rice Landscape Initiative:
attracting funding and financing to scale up sustainable
rice production
Introduction
Rice is a key staple crop in many parts of the world and an important commodity in agricultural trade. Rice
production systems face a number of sustainability challenges that could be addressed by developing innovative
financial mechanisms and promoting collaboration between public and private sector organizations. The 2019
Earth Security Group (ESG) report Financing sustainable rice for a secure future: innovative finance partnerships
for climate mitigation and adaptation (ESG, 2019) highlights the important role that various funding and financing
mechanisms can play in scaling up sustainable rice production.24 It identifies three blueprints:

create a digital finance platform for financing to reach smallholder farmers;

issue a “rice bond” to finance sustainable value chains; and

leverage international climate finance to attract private sector investment for climate-smart rice production.
One promising vehicle to leverage actions to scale up sustainable rice production are large-scale public-private
partnerships. This case study focuses on the Sustainable Rice Landscapes Initiative (SRLI), launched in 2018 by
the World Business Council for Sustainable Development (WBCSD), the Sustainable Rice Platform (SRP), FAO,
the United Nations Environmental Programme (UNEP), the International Rice Research Institute and the German
agency for international cooperation or Deutsche Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit (GIZ). This
collaboration initiative brings together diverse stakeholders to promote sustainable rice production practices,
with the overall aim of delivering a range of local and global environmental benefits and contributing towards the
achievement of the SDGs. SRLI helps meet the global demand for sustainable rice; its members recognize that this
involves transforming rice-based production landscapes through multi-stakeholder action (FAO, 2021a). SRLI aims
to attract resources, mainstream best practices and innovative technologies, and connect farmers to markets.
Rationale
The actions foreseen by SRLI are urgently needed. Worldwide, 144 million smallholder farmers produce rice and thus
contribute to food security for the 3.5 billion people who consume rice as their main staple food (The Food and Land
Use Coalition, 2021). Rice producers are often poor and have limited resources to manage climate and other shocks.
Production often caters primarily to local consumption, and thus plays a critical role in meeting food security goals.
24 This report was produced by the ESG in collaboration with the United Nations Capital Development Fund, the Sustainable Rice Platform (SRP), food and
agribusiness company Phoenix, the World Business Council for Sustainable Development (WBCSD) and the Swiss Agency for Development and Cooperation.
©FAO/A.K. Kimoto