--- Reducing GHG emissions ---

59 Outcomes SAIL is effectively contributing to several SDGs. Its overall goals are to contribute to the reduction of poverty (SDG 1) and increase food and nutrition security (SDG 2) for poor rural women and men in Egypt. The project introduces a number of innovative technologies that improve the efficiency of irrigation systems and provide alternative sources of energy that can reduce the high costs in the agriculture sector and help smallholders adapt to climate change (SDG 13 and SDG 7). In addition, the project contributes to promoting gender equality (SDG 5) and building the resilience of youth in rural areas; it does so by establishing community development associations, building capacity and providing vocational training, and facilitating the provision of rural financing.

Sustainably increasing productivity Efforts under SAIL to improve irrigation are helping to increase agricultural productivity in some of the target areas. The project has piloted soil-less hydroponic agriculture, which is an innovative technique to reduce water consumption and increase productivity. Through the organization of FFS, the project has promoted adaptive agronomic techniques based on the use of alternative crop types and varieties, cropping patterns and livestock breeds. These techniques are helping to reduce postharvest losses and increase the productivity of farmers in the target areas. Matching grants have allowed 112 women to improve the living standard of their families by developing alternative income-generating activities and thus diversifying the livelihood sources of their households.

Boosting farmers’ resilience to the effects of climate change The credit component of the project has allowed more smallholder farmers to implement adaptation and mitigation measures. The disbursement of loans started in early 2020. On 31 March 2020, 73 percent of all SME loans were used to modernize irrigation systems i.e. transform traditional irrigation systems into drip or sprinkler irrigation networks that help farmers cope with water scarcity. Other loans are used for investments in livestock production, agricultural processing or non-agricultural activities; these loans help communities diversify their livelihoods and thus build resilience to climate change impacts. While no loans have been disbursed for solar energy purposes as yet, the installation of solar-powered irrigation pumps during the project’s remaining years is expected to encourage farmers to apply for loans that could help transform their irrigation networks into solar-powered networks.

The installation of drip irrigation systems by project beneficiaries has increased farmers’ resilience to climate-induced water scarcity; at the same time, the construction of solar-powered pumps has brought mitigation benefits. The project is currently lining 10.5 km of mesqas and thus improving water management for 817 feddans (approximately 341 hectares) by reducing water losses. The project has also established five meteorological stations as part of an early warning system for climate change in the five target regions. The stations collect, process and provide weather- related information in a centralized manner. Meanwhile, efforts to improve drainage in 2 000 feddans (approximately 840 hectares) in Upper Egypt have helped improve water management systems and increased farmers’ resilience to water scarcity.

Reducing GHG emissions The project has introduced water pumping systems, as well as postharvest and processing equipment, that use renewable energy. The introduction of solar-powered pumping units in a number of targeted areas has increased energy efficiency and replaced diesel as the main energy source for pumping. In addition, the project has promoted biogas units as a renewable source of energy for domestic uses. Meanwhile, capacity-building activities have included workshops on recycling and the reuse of waste in composting.

This case study was submitted by the Environment, Climate, Gender and Social Inclusion (ECG) and the Near East, North Africa, Europe and Central Asia (NEN) Divisions of IFAD. ecgmailbox@ifad.org.