--- Page 35 ---

25
Introduction to supporting enabling policy
frameworks
Action point 2 of implementing CSA is building enabling policy frameworks. This introduction to
action point 2 draws on FAO’s CSA Sourcebook (FAO, 2021a).15
Creating enabling policy frameworks for CSA is a country-owned process that involves:

understanding the intended and unintended effects of current policies, and identifying gaps
in them (action point 1);

understanding the effects of climate change under various scenarios;

aiming for a coherent strategic framework to obtain the best results and access international
funding;

taking into account international agreements, national priorities across sectors and local
capacities for implementation;

designing policies that consider socio-economic and gender-differentiated barriers and
provide incentives to reach objectives;

engaging with all relevant stakeholders, including private sector and civil society actors, to
make sure the new policies catalyze synergies between the three pillars of CSA.
Many countries already employ policy frameworks that include (elements of) CSA. Relevant
frameworks include NDCs, intended nationally determined contributions (INDCs), nationally
appropriate mitigation actions (NAMAs), national agriculture investment plans (NAIPs), national
adaptation plans (NAPs), national adaptation programmes of action (NAPAs) and REDD+ strategies
and action plans. Taking stock of such existing policies is part of action point 1 of implementing
CSA (building the evidence base). Some countries may have already compiled a list of potential
CSA policies, legislation, practices and investments. Action point 2 refers to the assessment of these
options with a view to building a coherent framework that best supports national priorities and the
three pillars of CSA.
Efforts to build enabling policy frameworks may entail the creation of new policies or the modification
of existing ones. Ideally, all relevant ministries are involved in building an enabling environment for
CSA. Besides ministries of agriculture, ministries of labour and finance may play a pivotal role in
ensuring that no one is left behind. A variety of policy topics should be considered, such as the
building of effective national information systems and social safety nets, and disaster risk reduction.
A strong, coherent policy framework for CSA is important for all stakeholders. Governments play
a crucial role in creating an enabling environment for the scaling-up of CSA by providing the policy
and legal frameworks in which actors from the private sector and civil society work. The building
of effective CSA policy frameworks therefore requires a sound understanding of the priorities of all
stakeholders working on agriculture, climate change and other relevant fields.
The three case studies in this section discuss policy frameworks that are relevant to CSA in various
countries; they also discuss the steps involved in the implementation of such policies (e.g. the case
studies of CSA country profiles for Africa).
15 For a more detailed description of action point 2, please see FAO’s CSA sourcebook section C3 (www.fao.org/climate-smart-agriculture-
sourcebook/enabling-frameworks/module-c3-policy/c3-overview) and section C10 2.3 (www.fao.org/climate-smart-agriculture-
sourcebook/enabling-frameworks/module-c10-evidence-based-implementation/chapter-c10-2).