--- Moldova’s National Strategy for Agricultural and Rural Development for the period 2014−2020 acknowledges ---

28 Moldova − promoting conservation agriculture through policy engagement and capacity building for smallholder farmers Introduction Moldova’s National Strategy for Agricultural and Rural Development for the period 2014−2020 acknowledges that the agriculture sector not only plays an economic role, but also environmental and social roles. The strategy recognizes the challenges faced by agriculture today, including price volatility, climate change and rural poverty.

It identifies climate change adaptation priorities for the agriculture sector and aims to ensure that Moldova’s agricultural products comply with the European Union’s requirements for food security and safety. To support the strategy, IFAD established a country strategic opportunities programme (COSOP) for Moldova. This programme aims to build resilient livelihoods in marginal rural areas by promoting CSA and economic diversification, and improving talent retention and access to rural finance.

The Inclusive Rural Economic and Climate Resilience Programme (IRECRP), one of various IFAD programmes in Moldova, aims specifically to deliver on the opportunity of climate change innovation identified in the COSOP for Moldova. IRECRP promotes climate-smart agriculture to enhance the adaptive capacity of especially small-scale farmers in locations that are increasingly susceptible to climate shocks. The programme design reflects the links between various CSA action points, including the creation of an enabling policy environment (action point 2), strengthening the capacity of local and national institutions and stakeholders (action point 3), enhancing farmers’ access to finance (action point 4) and implementing conservation agriculture practices (action point 5).

IRECRP is jointly funded by IFAD, Danish International Development Agency (DANIDA), GEF and the Government of Moldova. The programme became effective on 25 August 2014 and is expected to be completed by 31 March 2021.

Rationale IRECRP was formulated based on the current and expected effects of climate change in Moldova. As evidenced by recent studies, the agriculture sector in Moldova is highly vulnerable to climate change and climate variability. Under a business-as-usual scenario with increased frequency and severity of climatic events (and particularly droughts), this leads to serious problems of production losses and threats to food security. Smallholder farmers in Moldova are highly sensitive and vulnerable to climate change due to their heavy reliance on subsistence rainfed agriculture. Their limited access to financial resources, technologies and adaptation knowledge results in a low adaptive capacity and ©CPIU IFAD/Vitalie Ababii