--- Program on Climate Change, Agriculture and Food Security [CCAFS]) and Nkulumo Zinyengere (agriculture specialist) and Amadou Ba ---

10 The four country-wide initiatives are (i) improving remote-sensing monitoring capabilities, (ii) including CSA in national agricultural extension services, (iii) developing agroclimatic information systems and (iv) monitoring soil fertility. These initiatives would help reduce poverty (SDG 1) and hunger (SDG 2) by increasing farm productivity and mitigating climate-related risks. They would enhance the capacities of beneficiaries to manage resources and access information needed to strengthen value chains. These processes would in turn contribute to decent work and economic growth (SDG 8).

The eight proposed climate-smart crop and livestock investments relate to value chains for non-timber forest products, flood recession agriculture, livestock, the integration of millet, sorghum and legumes, vegetables, the restoration of degraded lands, sustainable rice intensification and wheat. The CSAIP focuses on promoting resilience for some commodities and growth for others; where appropriate, it emphasizes both resilience and growth − a balance that is critical for the post-COVID-19 recovery strategy in Mali. The commodity-specific initiatives explicitly aim to bolster economic growth (SDG 8) and ensure the sustainable use of terrestrial ecosystems (to increase agricultural productivity) (SDG 2 and 15). Investments in value chains for non-timber forest products, integrated millet, sorghum and legumes systems, and production systems for vegetables target women producers (SDG 5) and youth (SDG 10) as beneficiaries.

Most of the investments address at least two of the three pillars of CSA jointly, primarily increasing productivity and enhancing resilience and adaptation. Indeed, these pillars are key objectives of the six commodity-specific initiatives and flood recession agriculture. GHG mitigation efforts (pillar 3) are an underlying goal of the proposed climate- smart investments and an integral objective of the investment towards restoring degraded lands.

Mali’s CSAIP leverages CSA investment to support national policies, including at least 13 Malian policies or programmes that address climate change or adaptation. The plan strongly aligns with Mali’s NDC in terms of higher-level objectives (e.g. national planning) and specific adaptation activities (e.g. water management) (World Bank, 2019).

This case study was submitted by Evan Girvetz (principal scientist and global programme leader, Finance and Investments for Climate Action with the Alliance of Bioversity International and International Center for Tropical Agriculture [CIAT] and the CGIAR Research Program on Climate Change, Agriculture and Food Security [CCAFS]) and Nkulumo Zinyengere (agriculture specialist) and Amadou Ba (senior agriculture economist) with the World Bank’s Agriculture and Food Global Practice.