--- the Ministry of the Environment and Water, the Autonomous Decentralized Provincial Government of Napo and ---

71
per unit of milk or meat are indirectly proportional to the level of productivity. In addition, emissions from the
livestock sector account for a significant part (8.56 percent) of the national GHG inventory (Ecuador, Ministry of
the Environment, 2017).
The production of cocoa has allowed small indigenous communities to improve their living conditions. However,
there are also problems related to cocoa production, including conflicts over land and limited institutional and
financial support for small and medium-sized producers. Deforestation, pollution, a lack of access to export markets
and limited knowledge of production costs constitute challenges. In addition, producers in the Napo province indicate
that they perceive climate risks, including temperature increases and variation in the intensity and seasonality of
rains (FAO, 2016d; GIZ, 2018). These climate change impacts are reported to have effects on the production of
cocoa and other income-generating crops as they increase the spread of pests and diseases and exacerbate soil
erosion and the loss of soil nutrients, which lowers yields. Other risks include strong winds, the overflowing of
rivers and estuaries and dry periods. There is a need to strengthen small and medium cocoa producers’ capacities
to adapt to the effects of climate change, for example by promoting the transfer of ancestral knowledge to young
people, disseminating information on agro-ecological management, diversifying incomes and connecting farmers
to stable markets.
Description
FAO developed its work on climate-smart livestock and cocoa production in close partnership with the Ecuadorian
Government. Under the climate-smart cocoa project, FAO is working with the Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock,
the Ministry of the Environment and Water, the Autonomous Decentralized Provincial Government of Napo and
the province’s cocoa consortium. Under the climate-smart livestock project, FAO has helped the government
formulate proposals for seven land use and development plans. It is also providing support for the development of
the country’s climate-smart livestock management strategy, which will strengthen the national livestock policy. In
addition, FAO has helped build the capacities of national rural extension technicians of the Ministry of Agriculture
and Livestock, strengthen their links with cattle producers and generate a training curriculum. At the provincial
level, training sessions were organized for male and female technicians that are permanently linked to the climate-
smart livestock project in seven provinces.
FAO further partners with BanEcuador, the main public bank of the country, to enhance financing options for
the implementation of CSA practices. In 2018, BanEcuador signed an agreement with FAO to enhance national
technical capacities for the analysis and design of green financial products. The climate-smart livestock project,
which provides relevant web tools, is a key ally for BanEcuador in the design and development of a green credit line
to promote sustainable livestock operations. Indeed, in May 2019, FAO and BanEcuador signed an agreement to
develop a green credit line to support the implementation of climate-smart livestock practices.
In the case of the climate-smart livestock project, CSA project activities at field level are implemented through
existing modalities, including FFS, co-financing with local counterparts, the provision of technical assistance, the
monitoring of GHG emissions and the establishment of strategic alliances. Meanwhile, the climate-smart cocoa
project is implementing actions to improve the quality of cocoa, strengthen entrepreneurial capacities and promote
the adoption of biodiversity conservation measures in cocoa production.
Outcomes
A wide range of field-level activities are implemented under the two projects, including:

FFS, which provide fully practical training using local scenarios and adult education techniques;

raising farmers’ awareness of the potential for carbon sequestration in the cocoa agroforestry system through
training;

developing an e-learning course on CSA for cocoa;

co-financing with local counterparts to implement good livestock practices;

developing a sustainable financing strategy for cocoa farmers’ associations;