--- Page 31 ---

21
Climate change is increasing the frequency and intensity of extreme events such as floods and droughts. While the impact
of floods is immediately apparent, drought is a slow process with devastating impacts on food production and on food
and nutrition security. Episodes of drought have increased in frequency and intensity over the past two decades in many
regions around the world as a result of climate change; this trend is expected to continue. Rainfed agriculture is the most
vulnerable to increasing climate variability. Irrigated agriculture is far less vulnerable to variations and changes in climate
than rainfed agriculture, and societies that practice irrigated agriculture are generally more resilient (as long as a reliable
water supply can be secured) (FAO, 2020b). Yields from agriculture with some type of water management can be three
or more times higher than yields from strictly rainfed agriculture (Molden, 2007). Thus, sound water management is
essential for building resilience against increased risks in food systems. Timely and reliable information on the condition
of irrigated and rainfed food crops all over the world is essential to mitigate the impact of droughts.
The data made available through WaPOR can be of great use to service providers who help farmers obtain consistent
yields and improve their livelihoods, as well as to government agencies wishing to modernize irrigation systems or
promote the efficient use of natural resources (FAO, 2021c).
Description
The data provided by WaPOR are of key importance to efforts to increase agricultural productivity while at the same
time using water more efficiently, to address problems of land and water scarcity. The spatial satellite measurements of
WaPOR offer unique insights into land and water productivity. In addition, the open source technologies developed in the
context of WaPOR allow for the dynamic incorporation of technological advances (such as the growing constellation of the
European Union’s Copernicus satellites) and the data they produce. While the WaPOR project focuses on the collection of
data, it explicitly aims for these data to be used by a variety of stakeholders. Policymakers at the national level, for example,
can use WaPOR data in evidence-based decision processes on issues such as water scarcity or water allocation strategies
in a changing climate. Meanwhile, researchers can tap into the wealth of seamless spatial data and time series (covering
the period from 2009 to date), while end users (including service providers and farming communities) benefit from the
development of problem-focused applications. The WaPOR project recognizes that barriers to its actionability may exist
for certain stakeholders. For example, farmers must be able and willing to adopt innovative practices based on information
and communications technologies (ICT) such as those provided by WaPOR. The enabling environment for the uptake of
the information and suggestions provided by WaPOR therefore determines the project’s ultimate success. This enabling
environment is determined by existing policies and institutions and by the availability of financing for CSA practices.
Outcomes
The first phase of the WaPOR project (2015−2021) paved the way for the design of potentially highly impactful
agricultural policies by generating:

an operational methodology and an open access data portal that publishes data in near-real time (usually
every ten days), at spatial resolutions ranging from 250 m to 30 m for selected pilot areas;12

specific assessments, in five river basins, of the consequences and sustainability of possible increases in
water productivity in agriculture, analysed based on a water accounting framework;13

capacity development of stakeholders to increase water productivity sustainably, including the development
of locally relevant ICT applications for farmers. These applications were developed in collaboration with
stakeholders to address relevant issues and tailored to local contexts, with technology ranging from
smartphone applications to simpler soil moisture sensors.14
The current second phase of the project focuses on strengthening capacities to interpret data and develop demand-driven
applications in target countries. The applications will be identified and developed in collaboration with different stakeholders.
They will be aligned with national strategies on climate action, water and food security and agricultural development.
12 See https://wapor.apps.fao.org/home/WAPOR_2/1.
13 For more information, visit www.fao.org/in-action/remote-sensing-for-water-productivity/water-accounting/results.
14 For more information, visit www.fao.org/in-action/remote-sensing-for-water-productivity/capacity-development/field-level-activities.
This case study was submitted by the WaPOR team in FAO’s Land and Water Division. wapor@fao.org.