--- This case study was submitted by Andrea K. Veira, crop scientist, CARDI Saint Lucia. ---

79 Advancing the three pillars of CSA The project attracted a lot of interest locally and regionally. It was successful at advancing the three pillars of the CSA approach. The project taught farmers and extension officers how to schedule crop production based on market demands and changing weather conditions, and thus increase productivity. The project shared a web application with participants to encourage crop scheduling, and divulged techniques for the efficient use of water through automated sprinkler irrigation and fertigation systems. Over 30 farmers and technicians of regional ministries of agriculture received training. When applied in the field, these techniques can boost productivity, and thus increase resilience.

Farmers’ improved understanding of changes and trends in weather patterns and the climate allowed them to plan production accordingly. Crop scheduling allows production to meet demand even under varying climate conditions, and ensures that food is produced locally during drought periods in Saint Lucia. The project raised regional participants’ awareness of the importance of crop scheduling, using Saint Lucia as an example. Thus, the project contributed to the strengthening of the region’s resilience to climate change.

Resilience can be increased by improving productivity and adopting ICT. In addition, the adoption of good agricultural practices as a component of farm systems is vital. Together with the technologies and techniques taught under the project, good agricultural practices can help reduce GHG emissions from farming. The implementation of good agricultural practices and efficient water use by farmers allow for natural carbon, water and nitrogen cycles to function effectively and conserve the environment. Carbon sequestration can be increased, and loss of nitrates through leaching reduced. By using fertilizers and water efficiently, farmers in the region can improve the environmental sustainability of their operations.

While the project was a success, there is a need for follow-up projects that monitor the implementation of these interventions and help farmers adopt the technologies learned. Improving farmers’ access to financing is another area that can be developed from this project; for example, loan packages may be offered to farmers to purchase the required equipment and technologies. These areas provide avenues towards CSA in the Caribbean that build on the foundation created by this project.

This case study was submitted by Andrea K. Veira, crop scientist, CARDI Saint Lucia. infocentre@cardi.org.