--- The World Cocoa Foundation is also divulging the ---

42 Description The project focused on mainstreaming CSA practices in cocoa-based farming systems, through applied climate science, certified supply chains and impact investing. Using existing value chain interventions, the project translated climate science into actionable strategies for farmers and supporting actors, including processors, certifiers and investors. This novel approach added value to existing efforts. By improving the knowledge and capacities of actors and institutions in the cocoa supply chain, the project aimed at promoting the adoption of locally relevant CSA practices at a wide scale.

In Ghana, the project first assessed the climate change exposure of cocoa systems at a subnational scale. It then developed appropriate CSA practices with farmers, incorporating additional cash and other food crops to increase the resilience of cocoa systems more broadly (economically and biophysically), and codified these practices into adaptation guidelines. These guidelines have since been mainstreamed through the Rainforest Alliance’s existing certification training curriculum; they are currently being used to evaluate the potential of innovative impact investment products to further the adoption of selected adaptation strategies. The results of the project were shared with government officials and industry leaders and publicized on platforms such as the World Cocoa Foundation to strengthen the capacities of institutions and stakeholders and promote the implementation of the findings at a wide scale.

By engaging with national and subnational stakeholders, the project has built a dynamic partnership that allows public and private actors to engage in a constructive dialogue and discuss the promotion of inclusive climate change adaptation strategies. As a result of the project, the potential impacts of climate change on cocoa cropping systems in Ghana, segmented by degree of climate exposure, have been identified; these impacts are now being considered in national planning and policy development. The project has taught the partners how to use scientific climate data to promote sustainable and profitable business and livelihood decision-making in the face of climate change and variability. It has furthered systemic adaption that is inclusive of the rural poor (and particularly of the most vulnerable among them) and viable over the medium to long term.

Outcomes Under the project, the Rainforest Alliance and its partners created, in collaboration with the World Cocoa Foundation, science-based training materials focusing on the climate risks faced in specific cocoa-growing regions.

The Rainforest Alliance has already begun using these materials in and around five natural reserves in Ghana’s Sui River landscape, a major cocoa-growing area in the Western Region.19 The new climate-smart manuals are being used by lead farmers in the Sui River landscape, which helps them prioritize and tailor CSA practices to their particular locations. The new materials are freely available online, which makes them potent tools to scale up transformation in cocoa-growing landscapes around the world.20 The World Cocoa Foundation is also divulging the manuals amongst its member companies.

The training materials enable farmers and other actors in the cocoa supply chain (including trainers) to make informed decisions about how to build resilience at farm level. The materials are not prescriptive, but allow for individual choices and different investment capacities. For example, the Hershey Company has, in collaboration with Farmerline, turned the materials into a smart phone application called CocoaLink; farmers can use this application to access CSA training materials based on an interactive risk map.21 By offering interactive contents in a variety of digital media (including videos, pictures and interactive quizzes), the application is aimed at training and incentivizing the next generation of Ghanaian cocoa farmers.

In March 2017, the Ghanaian Government and dozens of cocoa companies adhered to the Cocoa and Forests Initiative, which aims to end deforestation in the cocoa supply chain. Conserving forests is part and parcel of building climate resilience, as forests not only absorb the emissions that contribute to climate change but also provide crucial ecosystem services. The Cocoa and Forests Initiative provides a framework for action that strongly relies on CSA; 19 For more information, see www.rainforest-alliance.org/article/new-tools-for-climate-smart-cocoa-farming-ghana. 20 To consult the training materials, see https://stichtingra.resourcespace.com/?r=1969&k=28a230f501. 21 Farmerline is between Ghanaian enterprise that develops innovative ICT solutions (web and mobile applications) to help smallholder farmers increase their yields and income. For more information on Cocoalink, see Farmerline’s website at https://farmerline.co/cocoalink.