--- Page 19 ---

9 placing Mali in the medium-to-high vulnerability category for climate hazards. Rural poverty is extremely high at approximately 90 percent; a lack of access to agricultural inputs and financial (credit) and extension services has a limiting effect on possible productivity and resilience gains.

CSA is a multisectoral approach that focuses on improving agriculture, enhancing livelihoods, ensuring food security, building resilience and strengthening the economy in an environmentally sustainable manner. The goal of developing and implementing any CSA investment plan is to attract and channel financial resources towards priority CSA interventions, inform policymaking and help strengthen institutional and human capacities to implement CSA at a wide scale. CSA is particularly relevant for Mali, where agriculture accounts for 38 percent of GDP and employs over 80 percent of the workforce, while the country is highly vulnerable to the vagaries of climate change.

Investment in the agriculture sector is currently relatively low. Only 5.5 percent of total private sector investment goes into agriculture, and most of that investment goes into the production of cotton. Mali’s CSAIP is intended to help the country tap into the expanding climate finance landscape and unlock public, private and donor funding and financing for CSA.

Description The development of Mali’s CSAIP illustrates how the five action points of CSA implementation are connected, but not necessarily sequential. Besides identifying 12 key CSA investment areas with project concepts, the plan foresees the development of an M&E framework (action point 1). It is rooted in and complements Mali’s agricultural policies and targets (action point 2). Mali is a signatory to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) Paris Agreement and has submitted its first NDC. NDCs provide policy targets that are often related to agriculture. However, they do not always offer information on necessary investments. Efforts to reach the policy goals formulated in NDCs (and in national agriculture strategies) therefore benefit from additional information about potential sources of funding and financing that can help meet targets. If investors decide to fund projects formulated in Mali’s CSAIP, the plan will contribute to the implementation of CSA practices (action point 5). This implementation process can in turn contribute to building the evidence base for adequate CSA policy formulation.

Mali’s CSAIP targets investments for CSA based on four components of CSA planning and implementation, all of which contribute directly to the building of the evidence base: (i) situation analysis, (ii) prioritizing interventions, (iii) programme/project design and (iv) monitoring, evaluation and learning. These components provide a framework to identify a theory of change and decide how to adapt and implement activities to achieve the desired changes. CSA planning and implementation components are fundamental to M&E. In turn, M&E allows the Government of Mali, development partners and implementing agencies to track progress on activities, outputs, outcomes and impacts towards their targets, and to raise flags when adaptive actions may be necessary. M&E activities create a mechanism for learning, promote accountability and generate information that can form the basis of success stories.

Outcomes The negative impacts of climate change in Mali are visible and widespread. Changing weather patterns have a negative impact upon livelihoods and food security, especially of the rural poor. They are also altering traditional transhumance patterns, which greatly increases pressure on limited forage resources and causes conflict (World Bank, 2019). The 12 CSA investment areas identified by Mali’s CSAIP are the result of stakeholder consultations; they are based on climate change scenarios and policy-related agricultural and economic analysis. This combination of analytical work and consultations with diverse stakeholders is an important part of the process of building the evidence base for CSA. In the case of Mali’s CSAIP, this foundation enabled the authors of the plan to prioritize investments and identify potential barriers and opportunities related to those investments.

Mali’s CSAIP identifies four investments at the national level, six commodity-specific investments and two restoration projects, for a total value of USD 300 to 500 million. These investments would help 1.8 million beneficiaries and their families adapt to climate change, boost crop resilience and enhance yields. They would support and build synergies between several SDGs, including SDG 1 (No poverty), SDG 2 (Zero hunger), SDG 5 (Gender equality), SDG 8 (Decent work and economic growth), SDG 10 (Reduced inequalities) and SDG 13 (Combat climate change and its impacts).