--- Page 47 ---

37
Introduction to strengthening national and local
institutions
Action point 3 of implementing CSA is strengthening national and local institutions. This introduction
to action point 3 draws on FAO’s CSA Sourcebook (FAO, 2021a).17
Efforts to strengthen national and local institutions ideally adopt a capacity development approach
that involves:

assessing system-wide capacities;

designing contextualized and targeted capacity development interventions; and

monitoring and documenting progress and results, in collaboration with stakeholders.
Institutions that implement CSA policies and practices may include governmental, informal, non-
governmental and donor organizations. These actors are ideally mapped under action point 1 (building
the evidence base). Under action point 3, national and local institutions may be strengthened, and
potential capacity gaps may be addressed.
Capable national and local institutions play a very important role in supporting and empowering
farmers to implement CSA practices. They also allow policymakers at the national and local levels
to share knowledge and engage effectively in discussions and negotiations, including international
discussions on climate change and agriculture.
Strengthening institutions in an integrated and inclusive manner benefits from the adoption of a
capacity building approach. Such an approach allows institutions to best support the creation of an
enabling environment for CSA. A wide range of institutions and actors may benefit from capacity
building, including inter alia national governments, financial institutions, land tenure institutions,
customary law institutions, community-based organizations, insurance providers and information
and extension service providers. The wide range of potential beneficiaries of capacity building efforts
demonstrates the importance of an inclusive process in which stakeholders across all sectors are
involved.18
Ensuring that institutions have the necessary capacities to support the implementation of CSA
helps maximize the impacts of investments towards evidence building and policymaking. Strong
institutions can in turn contribute to efforts to update the evidence base and modify policies, when
necessary. Local institutions in particular can improve understanding of site-specific circumstances
and may therefore play a particularly valuable role in the process of implementing CSA.
The three case studies presented this chapter provide examples of how capacity building approaches
are applied to strengthen institutions implementing CSA in various countries, and how the results of
these processes contribute to the other CSA action points.
17 For a more detailed description of action point 3, see section C1 of FAO’s CSA sourcebook, available online at www.fao.org/climate-smart-
agriculture-sourcebook/enabling-frameworks/module-c1-capacity-development/c1-overview.
18 For more information on stakeholder engagement in CSA implementation, see module A1-2 of FAO’s CSA sourcebook, available at www.
fao.org/climate-smart-agriculture-sourcebook/concept/module-a1-introducing-csa/chapter-a1-2.