--- Directorate General for Agriculture, Hunting and Fishing. Emilia-Romagna is investing EUR 1.19 billion in rural ---

27 Description One of the entities that have invested most in rural development in the Region of Emilia-Romagna is the regional Directorate General for Agriculture, Hunting and Fishing. Emilia-Romagna is investing EUR 1.19 billion in rural development over the period 2014−2020, more than any other region in northern Italy. The Region has increased the funds invested in the agriculture sector through the current rural development programme (RDP) by EUR 131 million as compared to previous RDPs, and added an additional EUR 100 million for co-financing. Of the total investment of EUR 1.19 billion, EUR 20 million were spent on 93 projects related to agriculture and forestry under Measure 16.1.

Emilia-Romagna has gone to great lengths to expand its CSA impact evidence base (Chieco, Rossi and Tadić, 2019).

The analysis showed that 66 of the 93 projects were oriented towards CSA. The investments towards the creation of an enabling policy framework facilitated the formulation of innovative solutions. The diversity of the projects was most evident in their action goals, with some projects offering multiple solutions for a single threat or even tackling multiple threats. Fourteen projects promoted innovative solutions to address multiple threats simultaneously through a multidisciplinary and layered approach. The creation of OGs strengthened the interaction between private, public and research actors, who worked together towards a common goal.

Outcomes The OG projects in Emilia-Romagna have promoted the development of many innovative solutions that facilitate the gradual adoption of climate-smart farming practices. A notable example is the project entitled “Irrigation system optimization in fruit farming for adaptation to climate change”. This project was carried out jointly by the Department of Agricultural and Food Sciences of the University of Bologna, IBE and the Consortium for the Emiliano Romagnolo Channel in a commercial pear and apple orchard in Medelana, a municipality in the Ferrara province. The project aimed at devising a way to rationalize the use of irrigation systems by identifying best practices in water use and developing a protocol for sustainable orchard cooling irrigation. Indeed, as temperature fluctuations and heat waves are expected to become more frequent in the future, solutions for these extreme scenarios are needed. The two-year trial showed that this type of solution can reduce the temperature of the canopy by up to 4 °C, thus improving productivity.

The experiences of Emilia-Romagna have demonstrated that innovative solutions are more easily obtainable if researchers and policymakers collaborate towards a common goal. With 70 percent of rural development projects in the region being oriented towards CSA, it comes as no surprise that innovation has become a key term in the region’s agricultural policies. Rural development measures are promoting CSA practices to help farmers adapt to and mitigate the effects of climate change, thus changing the agriculture sector’s image of polluter. In addition to funding projects under Measure 16.1, Emilia-Romagna has formulated actions under Measure 16.2 (“Support for pilot projects and for the development of new products, practices, processes and technologies”) to take the promotion of CSA one step further. This measure supports projects that concern entire supply chains. Eight of the 25 animal production projects and 9 of the 30 plant production projects financed under this measure involved the adoption of CSA practices.

Overall, the OG projects in Emilia-Romagna have been shown to promote climate change-related innovation in agriculture and food production. Thirty-five percent of the projects aim at mitigating the effects of climate change, 21 percent promote climate change adaptation, 11 percent concern carbon sequestration and 33 percent combine adaptation and mitigation efforts.

Strategic investments in specific sectors are key to achieve results on a macroscopic level. The rural development programme of the region of Emilia-Romagna provides a way to manage large investments. Indeed, by formulating specific and clear objectives, the programme has made it clear to stakeholders, including farmers, food producers and research centres, where to concentrate their efforts. Emilia-Romagna is spearheading the promotion of new forms of resilient, low-impact and sustainable agriculture by including CSA standards in its policies. The region has demonstrated that the best way to further the integration of CSA in day-to-day practices is to make all stakeholders, including policymakers, researchers and businesses, work together towards common goals. This collaboration enables faster and more impactful innovation.

This case study was submitted by Federica Rossi, Slaven Tadic and Camilla Chieco of the Institute for BioEconomy of the National Research Council of Italy. It is based on: Chieco, C., Rossi, F. & Tadic, S. 2019. How can policy influence innovation: an exploration of climate-smart activities in Emilia-Romagna. Italian Journal of Agrometeorology, 1: 25–31. https://doi.org/10.13128/ijam-288