--- Page 90 ---

80 Conclusions The case studies presented in this publication demonstrate that CSA has grown from the conceptual stage to being implemented by many development partners worldwide. CSA is recognized in the 2019 report of the High Level Panel of Experts on Food Security and Nutrition (HLPE) as an innovative approach for sustainable agriculture and food systems that enhances food security and nutrition (HLPE, 2019). CSA can provide an essential way forward to transform agricultural systems in a context of climate change.

As highlighted in the introduction to this publication, transforming agri-food systems is crucial to meet the SDGs.

CSA may contribute to this transformation by sustainably increasing agricultural productivity and incomes, adapting and building the resilience of people and food systems to climate change, and reducing and/or removing GHG emissions where possible. The case studies presented in this publication show how CSA projects are contributing to many of the SDGs. They provide insights into the potential that is created by each of the action points, as well as by addressing multiple action points jointly. Indeed, the adoption of a comprehensive strategy − such as that of the five action points for the implementation of CSA − may be expected to improve results.

Regarding action point 1 (building the evidence base), the case studies confirm that CSA implementation requires a site-specific approach. What may be considered as a climate-smart practice in one location may not be considered as such in another location, given local circumstances (including agricultural and socio-economic circumstances) under climate change. Nevertheless, the sharing of knowledge may help build a more diverse and robust evidence base for CSA that partners around the world may draw on. Moreover, experiences related to the four other action points of CSA implementation should feed knowledge back into the evidence base, thus ensuring that research and practice are continuously connected.

As far as action point 2 (supporting enabling policy frameworks) is concerned, the case studies discussed in this publication provide insights into how various governments are already working to operationalize their approach to agriculture under climate change. The case studies show that this operationalization is taking place at regional, national and provincial levels and in collaboration with partners including organizations of the United Nations, research institutes and farmer communities.

Action point 3 (strengthening national and local institutions) is crucial in the process of implementing CSA. The case studies in this publication confirm that capacity building entails a range of activities, including the drafting of guidelines, the dissemination of best practices, and training.

Enhancing options for financing and funding, action point 4 of CSA implementation, is discussed in this publication in a broader scope than the one that is traditionally considered. Key actions to enhance these options include accessing climate finance instruments, creating links between climate and agricultural finance and investments, and considering climate change in agricultural planning and budgeting. The case studies in this publication illustrate the potential of these actions and propose innovative finance mechanisms, for example to help farmers invest in CSA practices and unlock the potential of large-scale public-private partnerships to attract resources.

The case studies highlighted under action point 5 (implementing practices at field level) highlight the importance of gaining a good understanding of the diverse needs and priorities of farmers and working directly with them. The case studies demonstrate that CSA must be considered as encompassing a broad range of practices. The studies illustrate how tools such as FFS, demonstration plots and ICT may prove valuable in a range of settings.

Each of the five action points is being implemented in CSA projects in various parts of the world. As CSA implementation is context-specific, the action points are not one-size-fits-all solutions. Indeed, rather than providing a strict sequential framework for CSA projects, they inspire actors to take a comprehensive look at how to better reach results, and what kind of partners to involve in the process.