--- to the Five Freedoms ---

SUSTAINABLE AGRICULTURE
PRINCIPLES & PRACTICES
13

Animal Welfare
PRINCIPLE
A sector that ensures welfare of livestock by adhering
to the Five Freedoms1, and promotes animal health
and natural behaviour.
PRACTICES
Animal welfare includes good stockmanship and husbandry (breeding and animal
care) and the principles of good housing, feeding, health and appropriate behaviour
and good breeding to both deliver and safeguard welfare. Practices which promote
animal welfare include:
• Eliminate the worse systems and practices, such as dehorning, teeth clipping
and tail docking, disbudding and castration / female spaying without anaesthetic
and analgesia, veal crates and single penning of calves, tethering of dairy cows,
gestation crates for sows (stalls), caged systems for poultry, etc.
• Avoid the use of animal production systems which promote rapid-growth practices,
overuse of antibiotics, breeding for high production traits that do not support good
animal welfare and health outcomes and rearing animals in barren environments.
• Implement non-confinement systems, including pasture access for cattle; group
housing and free farrowing for pigs; barn and free-range systems for poultry.
• Ensure good system design, including increased space allowances, the provision
of functional space and comfortable, enriched environments.
• Develop and implement proactive veterinary health plans, including robust antibiotic
stewardship schemes.
• Measure welfare outcomes and implement action plans to continuously
improve welfare.
CONTEXT
The treatment of animals reared
for human food provision is largely
determined by what society judges to
be acceptable based on ethics, morals,
resource efficiency, productivity, human
nutrition implications, market demand,
and general sustainability concerns.
Providing humane living conditions
for livestock is not only considered
morally right, but also contributes
to healthier animals and more
productive livestock systems.
SUPPORTING THE SDGs
There are no SDGs that refer to
animal welfare.
1 https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4810049/