--- ILO Convention 100 on Equal Remuneration. ---

SUSTAINABLE AGRICULTURE PRINCIPLES & PRACTICES 12 Working and Living Conditions PRINCIPLE An agricultural sector that ensures human rights are respected, by providing a pleasant working environment, free from forced or the worst forms of child labour, any type of discrimination1 and disciplinary practices2, work is appropriately compensated and managed, and access to suitable sanitary, housing and transportation infrastructures and services for farmers, farm workers and their families.

PRACTICES Human rights are the foundation for healthy working and living conditions.

There is a strong link with the principles of Health & Safety, Livelihoods, Water and Legal Compliance. They all are inter-related and practices should be mutually beneficial.

Practices which support human rights and positive working and living conditions include: • Implement systems to ensure there is no forced or bonded labour, coercion, harassment, or discrimination in any form against farmers or workers. • Support the education of farmers and farm workers and seek to ensure children have access to adequate education. • Ensure there is no discrimination based on ethnic groups, national origin, religion, disability, gender, sexual orientation, worker organisations or political affiliation. • Instil the same rights and obligations for women and men, while being sympathetic to local cultural practices. • Protect workers’ rights to associate, organise, and collectively bargain and provide access to grievance mechanisms. • Ensure, as a minimum, payment of legal minimum wage or wages negotiated collectively, including overtime pay, as well as equal remuneration for equal work between men and women. • Provide potable water for workers, and their families if living on farm. • Provide suitable sanitary, housing and transportation infrastructures and services for employees and their families, when living on the farm. • For cultural and socio-economic reasons, children under the minimum working age referred by national laws may help their parents on farm. It shall be ensured that they are not forced to work, do not work long hours and are not exposed to hazardous or heavy work. Work should not prevent children from attending school or other forms of education. • The individual situation of the children involved should be considered in relation to all actions implemented to eliminate the worst forms of child labour. All measures taken shall be designed to improve the living conditions of the individual child. Young workers under the age of 18 should not be exposed to situations in the workplace that are hazardous, unsafe or unhealthy, even more so than any other workers.

CONTEXT Most agricultural workers live in rural areas, a setting that often exacerbates gender inequalities and limits access to clean water, sanitation, education, and safe and equitable work. Sixty percent of child labour is found in agriculture, and the agricultural workforce continues to face some of the most precarious and dangerous working conditions in the world3. Improving working and living conditions for agricultural workers has the potential to impact millions of lives globally and create a more resilient, thriving agricultural sector. 1 as per ILO Convention 111 on Discrimination and ILO Convention 100 on Equal Remuneration. 2 as per the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. 3 ILO. 2017. Global estimates of child labour: Results and trends, 2012–2016. Geneva. (also available at https://www.ilo.org/ wcmsp5/groups/public/---dgreports/---dcomm/documents/ publication/wcms_575499.pdf) SUPPORTING THE SDGs