--- Clara, California, USA; ---

9

The bag was then joined to a transparent sampling bag, and the aluminum bag was collected
the next day (Condition I). After storage of these pots at 4°C for 1 month, the air inside
was released, the bag was closed, and the stopper was closed; 2 h later, a new aluminum
bag used for recovery was connected (Condition II). Measurement of the gas concentration
in these aluminum bags was performed using a Picarro G5131-i analyzer (Picarro, Santa
Clara, California, USA; https://www.sanyo-si.com/products/maker/picarro/, owned and
supported by Sanyo Trading Co., Ltd., Japan) according to a previously reported protocol93-
95.

Meta-sequence analysis of fungal communities in the soil
The fungal communities in PDA-containing soil with the fungal solution (soil prepared
for the experiment described in “Measurement of N2O from soil”) were determined based
on the DNA sequence information as previously described 96. In brief, DNA from soils
without (n=1) and with compost (n=1) selected randomly was extracted, and the fungal
ITS1 region was amplified from each replicate with the ITS universal primer sets for fungal
organisms established by GENEWIZ. The forward primer contained the sequence
“GTGAATCATCGARTC”
and
the
reverse
primers
contained
the
sequence
“TCCTCCGCTTATTGAT”. DNA sequencing was also conducted by GENEWIZ. Inc.,
Japan. Taxonomic assignments and estimation of relative abundances from sequencing
data were performed using the analysis pipeline of the QIIME software package
(https://docs.qiime2.org/). All 16S rRNA gene datasets were deposited in the GenBank
Sequence Read Archive database as described in Data availability.

Causal Mediation Analysis (CMA)
Individual causal mediation relationships were calculated using the R software package
"mediation" 97 based on the tutorial website (https://rpubs.com/Momen/485122). In brief,
the R software packages "mediation", "tidyverse", "knitr", and "caret" were used as
previously described 76. Each regression value in the SEMs was calculated by the 'lm'
function. In the case of the significant values, the values of the relationships between
components as mediators and outcomes were assessed using the 'mediate' function. As
previously described, the estimated average causal mediation (indirect) effect (ACME),
average direct effect (ADE), and proportion of total effect via mediation (Prop. Mediated)
were calculated by quasi-Bayesian confidence intervals and nonparametric bootstrap
intervals with 1000 stimulations ('sims=1000') as the numbers of calculations.

BayesLiNGAM
The BayesLiNGAM method 98, which is a Bayesian score-based approach, was applied
for the causal structural inference among components in optimal SEMs as previously
described. The BayesLiNGAM method was established by the "fastICA" package
(https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/fastICA) of R software. Based on the website
information
(https://www.cs.helsinki.fi/group/neuroinf/lingam/bayeslingam/),
the
percentage data calculated by BayesLiNGAM were visualized by the R package "igraph"
as previously described 76.