--- Sampler of Proven Practices ---

WHAT IS SUSTAINABLE AGRICULTURE? 3 Sampler of Proven Practices It’s impossible to list all the innovative and varied ways that farmers and ranchers improve sustainability, so consider our list below a sampling, not a prescription, of proven practice areas. We dedicate a page of this publication to illustrating each practice area in more detail.

OTHER RELATED TERMS There are many popular terms used to describe approaches to farming that are similar in both spirit and practice to the concept of “sustain- able agriculture.” Organic agriculture is one of the most common, but it is distinctly different. Unlike sustainable agriculture, organic falls under a cer- tification program of the USDA with clearly defined regulations that largely focus on both the elimination of syn- thetic inputs and the use of practices that promote soil health, biodiversity and animal health. Farmers who are certified organic will sometimes say they “go beyond organic” when they embrace sustainable practices that are outside the scope of the National Organic Program.

Regenerative agriculture is another term that has become popular in recent years, and it doesn’t have a standardized definition the way that organic does. The concept has arisen largely in response to the extreme effects of climate change and the degradation of natural resources that are vital to healthy farming systems.

Proponents of regenerative agricul- ture tend to emphasize practices that increase biodiversity on farms, includ- ing the use of perennials and livestock integration, as well as ones that im- prove soil health, such as cover crops and reduced tillage. The focus tends to be on sequestering atmospheric carbon and improving the conserva- tion of natural resources, such as soil, air, water and wildlife habitat.

CLIMATE RESILIENCE Conservation tillage systems, manure management, alternative energy and climate adaptation strategies, such as enterprise diversification SOIL HEALTH Cover crops, reduced tillage, crop rotation, organic matter additions, management-intensive grazing LIVESTOCK HEALTH AND HUSBANDRY Preventive health practices, stress reduction, reduced use of antibiotics/hormones, breed selection, animal welfare COMMUNITY VITALITY Social justice and equity, food sovereignty, urban agriculture, peer networks, local and regional food systems HEALTH AND WELLBEING OF PEOPLE Support for mental and physical health, workplace safety, fair compensation, social networking, interpersonal skills ECOLOGICAL PEST MANAGEMENT Crop rotation, beneficial organisms, integrated pest management (IPM), pest identification and scouting, soil health practices BIOLOGICAL DIVERSITY Wildlife and pollinator habitat, agroforestry, riparian buffers, crop/livestock integration, mixed species grazing, heirlooms and heritage breeds INNOVATIVE TECHNOLOGIES AND ENTERPRISES Precision agriculture, alternative energy systems, interseeders, new marketing channels, niche products, value-added processing Cover photo credits: top row photos by Preston Keres, USDA; middle row photos by Lance Cheung, USDA; first bottom-row photo by Dan Macon, University of California Extension; others by Preston Keres. Opposite page photo credits (from top): Preston Keres; Jason Johnson, NRCS; Lance Cheung; and Brandon O’Connor, NRCS.

Photo by Preston Keres, USDA