--- Bringing Nutritious Options to Food Deserts ---

www.sare.org SARE 2023/2024 REPORT FROM THE FIELD 17 NORTH CENTRAL SARE Bringing Nutritious Options to Food Deserts This SARE youth grant project was the foundation to establishing the national presence that Legacy Taste of the Garden has today.

John Jamerson, Legacy Taste of the Garden THE CHALLENGE Urban areas with limited access to fresh and affordable food, commonly known as food deserts, are typically located in histor- ically marginalized communities. Residents in these areas often have poorer health outcomes and may lack knowledge about food nutrition and preparation. Legacy Taste of the Garden is a Black-owned, multi-generational farm occupying four acres across three Indiana locations. With a goal to address the region’s food access and information needs, Legacy secured a Farmer/Rancher grant to promote and offer fresh and local food, educate their community about traditional farming and gardening methods, and close the gap between local producers and consumers.

THE ACTIONS TAKEN Legacy Taste of the Garden Operations Director John Jamerson partnered with two other area farms to educate youth and adults alike about urban farming practices and business opportunities. Participants learned about Legacy’s farming methods like using hoop houses and bucket systems, as well as about direct marketing models like community-supported agriculture (CSA). Additionally, Jamerson collaborated with chefs to create educational program- ming and materials centered on nutrition and food preparation, including a “28-day challenge” that guided participants through a month-long, plant-based diet. An app was developed to direct community members to local food options. The multi-faceted project connected consumers to local producers and provided an example of how one can oper- ate and sustain an urban farm business.

THE IMPACTS Legacy Taste of the Garden was highly suc- cessful at its efforts to improve local food access and to generate enthusiasm for sus- tainable agriculture and nutritious whole foods. Specific impacts include: • Increased availability of fresh food:

Community members gained access to fresh produce thanks to Legacy’s decision to grow food across three separate food- desert locations. • Local outreach: Legacy Taste of the Garden not only provided education on sustainable agriculture practices, but they also conducted workshops, 4-H programs and virtual cooking demonstrations about preparing healthy food. • Community engagement: The project led to partnerships with local organiza- tions, libraries, churches and farmers.

Social media efforts and a website con- nected food producers with consumers through information on events, markets and crop availability.

Learn more: See the related SARE project FNC19-1169.

Denise Greer Jamerson is a fifth-generation farmer who co-manages Legacy Taste of the Garden along with her husband, John Jamerson, and their son.

Photo by ©Journal Communications/Jeff Adkins