--- Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) ---

Conservation Agriculture During the past 40 years, the world has lost a third of its arable land, about 430 million hectares. Conservation Agriculture is a farming system that can prevent such losses while regenerating degraded lands. It promotes minimum mechanical soil disturbance (no/zero tillage), maintenance of a permanent soil cover and diversification of plant species. It enhances biodiversity and natural biological processes above and below the ground surface, which contribute to increased water and nutrient use efficiency and to improved and sustained crop production. ©FAO/J. Kienzle ©ACT/B. Njenga What we do Conservation Agriculture is a concept in support of sustainable land management, environmental protection and climate change adaptation and mitigation.

Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) promotes the adoption of Conservation Agriculture principles (minimum mechanical soil disturbance (no/zero-tillage, permanent soil cover and crop rotations) that are universally applicable in all agricultural landscapes and cropping systems.

FAO’s support to members includes: 1.

Designing, formulating and planning national strategies and policies that provide incentives for farmers to adopt Conservation Agriculture practices and invest in sustainable agricultural mechanization.

This allows farmers – especially smallholders – to move away from inefficient agronomic management practices and manual labour to appropriate levels of mechanization that offer higher returns. 2.

Training farmers, service providers and extension agents on Conservation Agriculture practices and sustainable mechanization. Developing and disseminating training materials and guides to raise awareness and to incorporate into agricultural universities’ curricula and government programmes. 3.

Implementing location – specific practices and identifying suitable crops to improve production systems that are resilient to the effects of climate change, as well as identifying existing or potential markets for inputs and/or outputs. 4.

Increasing agricultural production by implementing Conservation Agriculture practices in support of national priorities linked to food and nutrition security.

Maize under Conservation Agriculture intercropped with drought tolerant Dolichos lablab in Kenya