--- Cabo Verde, Guinea-Bissau and Seychelles. In Cabo Verde, the CPF output targeted is the promotion of profit- ---

33 CSA country profiles contribute to some major outputs of the FAO’s Country Programming Framework (CPF) for Cabo Verde, Guinea-Bissau and Seychelles. In Cabo Verde, the CPF output targeted is the promotion of profit- oriented farming and ranching systems that implement environmentally friendly practices and help reduce poverty.

In Guinea-Bissau, the CPF output targeted is the building of more efficient and inclusive crop, livestock and fish value chains, considering market opportunities and access. In Seychelles, the targeted CPF output is the creation of conducive and enabling policies and regulatory frameworks that create business opportunities that link tourism and agriculture.

Outcomes The development by FAO and its partners of CSA profiles for countries in Africa has generated knowledge that is used to develop evidence-based interventions and CSA investment plans at national and regional levels. Thanks to this knowledge, the capacities of local institutions and of farmers to implement projects in the field have been enhanced.

At the country level, CSA country profiles have helped the Governments of Benin and Côte d’Ivoire formulate CSA action plans; Cote d’Ivoire also developed a CSA investment plan, with support from the World Bank. At the regional level, CSA country profiles contributed to the development of a CSA regional outlook for three of Africa’s SIDS. The CSA profile for Ghana was instrumental in the development of a local (district-level) CSA investment plan and the formation of a CSA alliance comprising local organizations working on CSA in the country.

Several projects at field level that focus on the priorities of local farmers are currently being implemented. In Côte d’Ivoire, there is a project that aims to improve the production of rice and bioenergy, while in Ghana, there is an agroforestry project that focuses on cocoa. Meanwhile, FFS in Cabo Verde demonstrate CSA practices to local farmers.

The country profile for Benin has contributed to the development of a national CSA project proposal that is to be submitted to the GCF or other climate funds; this proposal focuses on the implementation of adaptation measures.

In Nigeria, the development of CSA profiles for the states of Adamawa, Borno and Yobe in the north-eastern region of the country has resulted in the establishment of a platform for dialogue on CSA policymaking that operates at the level of the state in each of the three states; these platforms bring together academics, policymakers and representatives of farmers’ organizations and of NGOs working on CSA. The CSA profiles for the states of Adamawa, Borno and Yobe have led to the preparation of a joint proposal for an adaptation project focusing on the implementation of CSA best practices and technologies; the proposal is to be submitted to the GEF or the Adaptation Fund.

The initiatives that are currently being prepared or implemented in Benin, Cote d’Ivoire, Gambia and Nigeria demonstrate that country profiles provide useful baseline information that can support the development of projects and programmes related to climate change.

At the regional level, a synthesis report is currently being developed for three African SIDS (Cabo Verde, Guinea- Bissau and Seychelles) and for the Sahel (Burkina Faso, Chad, Mali and Niger). This report aims at identifying common and country-specific needs and priorities for CSA investments.

In the immediate future, projects may prioritize the development of profiles for the remaining African SIDS, as well as for landlocked countries such as Burundi, Central African Republic, Comoros, Lesotho, Mauritius, Rwanda, Sao Tome and Principe, South Sudan, Sudan and Zambia − depending on the availability of funding.