--- Pastures, as Part of Sustainable Land and Water Management in Drylands. ---

68
special attention to the representation of women in resource users’ associations, where men are still overrepresented.
The GEF project helps deliver multiple global environmental benefits by:

improving agriculture in drylands by demonstrating and adopting agricultural practices, such as practices
that help preserve agricultural biodiversity to reduce GHG emissions and increase vegetation cover; and

rehabilitating degraded agricultural land, including pastures and transition zones; this is done by adopting
innovative technologies and practices and improving the management of soil and water resources and
crop production methods in drylands to increase soil organic carbon concentrations and boost carbon
sequestration.
In addition, the project will increase the resilience of agro-ecosystems to climate change, thus contributing to the
socio-economic development and food security situation of the country.
Description
One of the project components is entitled Promoting and Demonstrating Climate-Smart Agriculture, including
Pastures, as Part of Sustainable Land and Water Management in Drylands.
The objective of this component is to implement CSA (including climate-smart pasture management) by introducing
improved land management and rehabilitation practices and reducing conflicts between the users of forests and
rangelands. Eighty-eight percent of Kyrgyzstan’s farmland is considered degraded. New and innovative approaches
to sustainable and climate-smart land management of cropland and pastures have not been widely introduced due
to the country’s history of central planning and the lack of incentives for local land users to test new sustainable
land management (SLM) practices. The project therefore supports demonstrations of innovative land management
practices on cropland and pastures; it is expected to result in the improved management of 10 907 ha of cropland
(and thus contribute to carbon storage of 58 530 tCO2 eq/year) and the restoration of 20 000 ha of pastures (thus
contributing to carbon storage of 62 088 tCO2 eq/year).
Under this project component, cartographic material was developed in July 2015 for 10 000 ha of cropland, 5 000 ha
of forest land and 20 000 ha of degraded rangelands, in collaboration with Kyrgyzgiprozem, the state design institute
on land management. A geobotanical survey (considering inter alia habitat characteristics) was carried out for
the pastures, while for the cropland soil analysis was undertaken, looking into humus content, soil structure, use
and degradation. Based on the survey, recommendations regarding the rehabilitation of degraded lands, the use
of technologies, the selection of plant species and the layout of planting were formulated. A pasture management
coordination group was established under the Ministry of Agriculture, Water and Regional Development, involving
FAO project experts. The project also cooperates with a number of NGOs (including the Kyrgyz Association of
Forest and Land Users, Central Asian Mountain Partnership Alatoo and BIOM) that have experience in the building
of capacities of pasture committees and communities.
Outcomes
The integrated and cross-sectoral approach to generating carbon benefits in the forestry and agriculture sectors
promoted by the project is completely new to Kyrgyzstan. FAO has recently developed a national forest monitoring
system for REDD+ (carbon monitoring system in the AFOLU sectors). This system will be underpinned by policy
and institutional reforms that will integrate carbon emission reduction and sequestration targets into integrated land
use plans at the national, provincial and local levels. On the ground, the project uses sustainable forest management
(SFM) and SLM approaches and technologies that have not previously been widely applied in Kyrgyzstan, such as
technologies related to multifunctional forestry, integrated forest and pasture management and organic agriculture.
The project also works to upscale efforts to establish payment for ecosystem services schemes, FFSs and public-
private partnerships.
The main activity undertaken by the project to achieve these results is the preparation of a manual that describes
interesting innovative SLM technologies and practices based inter alia on the World Overview of Conservation
Approaches and Technologies. These technologies and practices include practices that help preserve agricultural