--- on the updating of statistical surveys. In addition, the Climate Change Project Implementation Unit (the Mongolian ---

40 Outcomes Mongolia The CBIT AFOLU project in Mongolia helps the national government prepare for the ETF process by organizing forums, meetings and training sessions to strengthen capacities of national stakeholders and improve institutional arrangements.

A national measure, report and verify network is being established under the project, under the Ministry of Environment and Tourism. This network will engage with key ministries (e.g. the Ministry of Food, Agriculture and Light Industry and other sectoral ministries) and prepare measure, report and verify protocols for ETF reports and NDC updates, to promote coordination among institutions. As part of the current NDC updating process, the CBIT AFOLU project supported the organization of a national-level forum in November 2019 on NDC in which key government agencies, as well as representatives of the private sector, international organizations and civil societies participated.

One of the planned actions of the CBIT project in Mongolia is to help strengthen measurement protocols for mitigation actions in the AFOLU sector in the country. In partnership with the Agency for Land Administration, Management, Geodesy and Cartography, training sessions have been organized to introduce the Collect Earth tool.

Based on this tool, an assessment of land use, land use change and forestry from 1990 to 2019 was carried out.

The results of this assessment will help the country prepare its second biennial update report and fourth national communication to the UNFCCC.

Under the CBIT project, officials from the national government and from provincial authorities and other stakeholders received training on the 2006 guidelines of the IPCC , on ETF modalities, procedures and guidance, and on the updating of statistical surveys. In addition, the Climate Change Project Implementation Unit (the Mongolian entity responsible for ETF) received assistance from the project to develop an assessment of peatland changes over the period from 1970 to 2018. The unit is also developing a monitoring and reporting framework for adaptation in the AFOLU sector, and formulating quality assurance and control protocols for data and information to improve reporting on adaptation in the AFOLU sector. Furthermore, a national framework for climate change monitoring and evaluation is being developed under the CBIT project; this framework is consistent with ETF modalities, procedures and guidance for tracking progress towards climate change priorities in the AFOLU sector.

Cambodia In Cambodia, the CBIT project is at an earlier stage of implementation, but progress is being made. The Cambodian National Council for Sustainable Development, the Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries and the Ministry of Environment are working together under the CBIT project to identify capacity needs for ETF reporting and for the collection of information to update NDC priorities for the agriculture sector. The CBIT project actively supported the preparation of the country’s NDC update in 2020 by providing data and analysis to evaluate and prioritize past and potential new priority actions for adaptation and mitigation in the AFOLU sectors. The project provided technical support to the Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries through an interministerial consultation process.

In addition, the CBIT project is supporting further coordination and discussions between relevant national partners to identify policy framework needs, information and capacity gaps for ETF reporting, and appropriate tools and methodologies to improve data collection, quality control and reporting on GHG emissions and their reduction or removal. A detailed programme of technical support to strengthen systems and tools for monitoring and tracking mitigation and adaptation activities is under development.

The project is continuously exploring possibilities to build synergies between initiatives implemented in collaboration with FAO and other relevant partners. These efforts aim to fill information and data gaps and thus help the Government of Cambodia meet its reporting commitments towards its NDC, as well as localized SDGs.

This case study was submitted by Lina Jihadah (junior professional officer) and Beau Damen (natural resources officer) of the FAO Regional Office for Asia and the Pacific, Tuya Tserenbataa (project manager) and Saruul Dolgorsuren (project specialist) of FAO Mongolia, and Chansopheak Ann (operations coordinator − forestry programme) of FAO Cambodia. FAO-RAP@fao.org.