--- Climate-smart agriculture and the SDGs ---

2
In order to track progress towards results under the three pillars of CSA, it is important that monitoring and
evaluation practices are streamlined across these five action points.
This publication aims to contribute to the Decade of Action to deliver the Global Goals that was declared by the
United Nations Secretary General in 2020 to meet the SDGs by 2030. The publication presents examples of climate-
smart agricultural research, policies, institutions, financial instruments and practices around the world. These
case studies are grouped into chapters according to the five action points of CSA, to reflect the breadth of CSA
implementation.
The aims of this publication are to demonstrate the relevance of all five action points of CSA implementation,
inspire stakeholders to implement CSA actions in response to climate change, show how recent CSA projects are
contributing to the SDGs, and formulate recommendations for future projects based on the five action points
approach.
The case studies show how CSA enables food producers around the world to develop agricultural strategies to build
sustainable livelihoods and ensure sustainable food security in the face of climate change. CSA allows stakeholders
at local, national and international levels to identify agricultural strategies that are suitable to local conditions. CSA
contributes to FAO’s goal of making agriculture, forestry and fisheries more productive and sustainable, and thus
fits in with FAO’s vision for sustainable food and agriculture. Lessons learned from the case studies discussed in
this publication include:

The linkages between agriculture and climate change are site-specific. Analysis based on site-specific findings
may therefore lead to the selection of different climate-smart agricultural practices for different sites.

Results under the three pillars of CSA are best achieved through a comprehensive strategy, such as the five
action points approach highlighted in this publication.

The five action points of the CSA approach are all crucial to effectively implement CSA; they have been
applied in various contexts to achieve results under the three CSA pillars.

Not all projects need to focus on all five action points. In addition, the action points are not necessarily
consecutive actions, but rather actions that may or may not be undertaken at the same time; ideally, they
reinforce each other to create an enabling environment. For example, a robust evidence base should
support enabling policy frameworks, national and local institutions, funding and financing options, and
the implementation of CSA practices at field level. Each of these actions may in turn generate valuable
knowledge that feeds back into the evidence base.

Knowledge sharing and working with diverse partners is essential for all five action points, as the sum of the
knowledge and practices of various partners is larger than its parts.
By providing examples of the operationalization of the five action points approach, the case studies may inspire
international organizations, governments, researchers, private sector actors, non-governmental organizations
(NGOs) and farmers to play an active role in CSA implementation and frame their actions in a wider process, which
may lead to the identification of possible partnerships.
This publication contributes to and builds on FAO’s ongoing efforts to broaden the knowledge base on CSA. After
the FAO publications Climate-smart agriculture case studies. 2018. Successful approaches from different regions
(FAO, 2018a), Climate-smart agriculture and the SDGs (FAO, 2019b) and Operational guidelines for the design,
implementation and harmonization of monitoring and evaluation systems for climate-smart agriculture (FAO,
2019c), this publication highlights how recent CSA interventions apply the five action points of CSA and contribute
towards the SDGs. This publication draws on FAO’s Climate Smart Agriculture Sourcebook (FAO, 2021a) as the
reference point for the descriptions of the action points.