--- – Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO, 2017, xi) ---

BG-12.13
Sustainable Agriculture
“Much progress has been made in reducing hunger and poverty and improving food security and
nutrition. Gains in productivity and technological advances have contributed to more efficient
resource use and improved food safety. But major concerns persist. Some 795 million people still
suffer from hunger, and more than two billion from micronutrient deficiencies or forms of over
nourishment. In addition, global food security could be in jeopardy, due to mounting pressures on
natural resources and to climate change, both of which threaten the sustainability of food systems
at large. Planetary boundaries may well be surpassed, if current trends continue.”

– José Graziano da Silva (FAO, 2017, vii)
“High-input, resource-intensive farming systems, which have caused massive deforestation, water
scarcities, soil depletion and high levels of greenhouse gas emissions, cannot deliver sustainable
food and agricultural production. Needed are innovative systems that protect and enhance
the natural resource base, while increasing productivity. Needed is a transformative process
towards ‘holistic’ approaches, such as agroecology, agro-forestry, climate-smart agriculture
and conservation agriculture, which also build upon indigenous and traditional knowledge.
Technological improvements, along with drastic cuts in economy-wide and agricultural fossil fuel
use, would help address climate change and the intensification of natural hazards, which affect all
ecosystems and every aspect of human life.”

– Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO, 2017, xi)
“The average Canadian household saves more than $4,000 on their annual food bill because
farmers use plant science technologies to help protect their crops from insects, weeds and
diseases.”

– CropLife Canada, 2017
“Canada will become the trusted global leader in safe, nutritious, and sustainable food for the 21st
century.”

– The Advisory Council on Economic Growth