--- in production from Green Revolution ---

BG-12.9 Sustainable Agriculture ■ ■Global agricultural production has increased threefold from 1960–2015 due to increases in production from Green Revolution technologies, including a heavy reliance on fossil fuels, water, and other agricultural inputs, and expansion of new agricultural land. These practices have decreased the sustainability of agricultural production. ■ ■Global yield increases have now slowed in terms of bushels per acre or kilos per hectare.

Future increases in yield are predicted to be due to the development of adapted and improved varieties of crops and getting these new varieties to farmers who can benefit. This raises the social issue of the trend towards proprietary biotechnology within agriculture, as these protection instruments prevent advances in food production from being shared by all. Privatization of knowledge and tools that can improve the sustainability of agriculture means that these are not available to all farmers ■ ■Modern agriculture is more extensive (advances in technology allow for fewer people to cultivate more acres of farmland) and intensive (high use of inputs) than historic agriculture was. As a result, agriculture’s negative impact on the natural environment is now visible in a variety of ways. ■ ■Currently there is competition over natural resources for both food and non-food products (e.g., competition over forests, which act both as the cleaners and keepers of water for agriculture, and as providers or raw goods in the form of wood for loggers; competition over land for various uses including agriculture, city expansion, infrastructure, mining, etc.). ■ ■Disparity exists among global farmers and international consumers. It is important that the interests of the poorest farmers and poorest consumers are considered. Everyone needs to be able to create, sell, and buy food at reasonable prices for the system to be truly sustainable. ■ ■The world is currently able to produce adequate food to satisfy the needs of the global population, but waste, cost, and transportation prevent food from being equally distributed to all. ■ ■Reducing food loss and waste would lessen the need for increases in agricultural production, as 40% of the food produced does not end up being consumed.