--- Strategy “Best Fit” Tests ---

Without clarity, each management decision will require a round of agonizing debate and it will be difficult for everyone in your organization to see where the business is headed. These are the types of situations that breed conflict between family members and partners. Your strategic plan should be something that you, your family, and any other stakeholders, can embrace and move toward decisively.

Minnesota economist Kent Olson recommends testing your business strategy or strategies from several perspectives before making the final decision to implement it. Olson outlines a series of subjective “tests” that can be used to rank each of the major strategy alternatives that you are considering (including your base plan) and help you choose the best strategy for your business (Figure 96). He suggests giving each strategy a subjective score, from one to five (five being the highest) for each test. The strategy with the highest score is apparently the best for the farm and for you and your family. You will need to be brutally honest.

Take into account the research and evaluation that you have conducted as a team thus far when scoring each whole farm business strategy.

The Minars used the tests to score their base plan and the alternative milk processing strategy (on Worksheet 4.38 as shown in Figure 97). They gave a high score to the processing alternative.

It appeared to offer the most promise for future business stability and job creation—objectives that the Minars, as a family, place great importance on.

Conversely, the base plan, which reflected their present business, received low scores in all areas related to the family’s future vision. Only those 4 TASK 180 BUILDING A SUSTAINABLE BUSINESS Vision Consistency Test. How well does the proposed strategy fit with your whole farm and personal vision? If the strategy does not lead toward your personal and business vision or embrace the core values of your planning team, it should be rejected. Success and enthusiasm will be low and the plan is unlikely to succeed otherwise.

Goodness of Fit Test. How well does the proposed strategy fit with your external analysis of the industry and the internal analysis of your farm? Does the proposed strategy explain how it will build on your business’ current strengths and opportunities while managing for weaknesses and threats?

Recall your SWOT analysis from Worksheet 2.18 (in Planning Task Two).

Building for the Future Test. How well does the proposed strategy build for the future? Recall your vision from Planning Task Three. Will your business strategy help get you there?

Moreover, will your strategy generate resources, such as soil quality and financial equity, for the next generation? If a strategy uses but does not generate resources, it should receive a low score for this test.

Feasibility and Resource Test. How realistic are the business’ start-up and long-term resource needs? In other words, are resources available to implement your whole farm strategy? Review your current list of resources (Worksheet 2.3) and compare them to your resource needs (Worksheet 4.14 in Planning Task Four). Is your soil type appropriate for the crops that you want to grow? Can people be hired to do the work needed? Can financing be obtained?

Performance Test. How well does the proposed strategy help accomplish your marketing, operations, human resources and financial goals for the farm business? What are the projections for income, rates of return, and net worth growth? Most importantly, can your business survive the transition period?

Importance Test. How well does the strategy address the important or critical planning issues that you identified in Introduction Worksheet? Does your strategy focus on these important issues or on the trivial? If a proposed strategy does not address important issues then it should be rejected as written.

Confidence Test. How high is the confidence of your planning team in the anticipated outcomes of the proposed strategy? How high is the risk that events will occur that will change the expected results—particularly in a negative direction?

Figure 96.

Strategy “Best Fit” Tests 70 70Adapted from A Strategic Management Primer for Farmers, Olson, 2001.