--- Page 260 ---

Intermediate assets: assets with a useful life of ten years or less, such as breeding livestock, machinery and equipment.

Intermediate liabilities: intermediate (five to seven years) debt obligations for loans on equipment, machinery, and breeding livestock.

Invoice: an itemized list of goods shipped, usually specifying the price and terms of sale.

Labeling: any written, printed, or graphic representation that is present on the label of a product, accompanies the product, or is displayed near the product at its point of sale.

Land: in accounting terms is the value of real estate minus the value of improvements, such as buildings.

Liability: a loan, expense or any other form of claim on the assets of a business that must be paid or otherwise honored by the business.

Liquidity: a business’ ability to meet current obligations with cash or other assets that can be quickly converted to cash.

Long-term assets: assets with a useful life of more than ten years, such as farm land and buildings.

Long-term liabilities: long-term (eight years or more) debt obligations for buildings and equipment.

Market identity: the ability to create familiarity and loyalty for a product or business in the eyes of the customer through promotions, packaging, labeling, product name and other factors.

Marketing: the process through which a business creates and keeps customers.

Market niche: a particular appeal, identity or place in the market that a product or business has; what a business does well that is different or better than other competitors in the market.

Market segmentation: the separation of one large market into smaller markets or categories; by product, customer, geography or industry.

Market share: the percent of the target market that a business hopes to capture.

Market trends: factors that indicate where the market is headed; changes in customer needs or preferences, shifts in population, establishment of new industries in the area.

Natural: a substance derived from plant, animal or mineral source that has not undergone a synthetic process.

Financial risk: the risk associated with the use of borrowing and leasing; uncertainties about the ability to meet financial obligations.

Fiscal year: an accounting period of 12 months.

Fixed costs: operating expenses that generally do not vary with business volume. Examples include rent, property taxes, and interest expense.

Forage: vegetable matter, fresh or preserved, that is gathered and fed to animals as roughage; includes alfalfa hay, corn silage, and other hay crops.

Forward contracting: a method of selling crops before harvest by which the buyer agrees to pay a specified price to a grower for a portion (or all) of the grower’s crops.

Futures contract: an agreement between two entities, one that sells and agrees to deliver and one that buys and agrees to receive, a certain kind, quality, and quantity of product to be delivered during a specified delivery month at a specified price.

General partnership: one or more partners are jointly responsible or liable for the debts of the partnership.

Green manure: a crop that is grown and then plowed into the soil or left to decompose for the purpose of soil improvement.

Growth potential: the increased amount of money, expansion, activity and other developments that are likely for a business based on product marketing, management skill, industry growth and other factors.

Handler: any person engaged in the business of handling agricultural products.

Identity preserved product: a product that meets production, packaging, storage, and transportation requirements designed to preserve the genetic or physical identity of the product.

Image advertising: an advertising strategy that builds awareness and interest in products through the use of a name, term, sign, symbol, design or some combination.

A brand and logo is used to identify the products of a business and distinguish them from competitors.

Inspector: a person independent from the decision- making process who is accredited to perform inspections for certification agents.

Intermediary: a business that helps buy, sell, assemble, store, display and promote products; they help move products through the distribution channel. Intermediaries include retailers, wholesalers, distributors, brokers and cooperatives.

Glossary 259 BUILDING A SUSTAINABLE BUSINESS