--- Analyzing Land Investments, Business Management in ---

Land and buildings. Land and buildings can be purchased, rented or leased (Figure 64). Each of these acquisition options has financial advantages and disadvantages, which will be discussed further later, when you address finance strategies. For now, though, you should realize that land acquisition options should be weighed carefully. Land purchase decisions can make or break your business. They often require a large amount of capital and a long-term commitment. In a video presentation, Gayle Willett says “Purchasing real estate is one of the most important decisions a business may make . . . It is important not to let emotion overrule sound business judgment . . . .Consider both what the land is worth to the business and what you can pay for the land and still have cash flow.”40 If purchasing land is a part of your operations strategy, you’ll evaluate the feasibility of that strategy carefully in the finance sections. You’ll need to discuss cash flow, tax and equity implications with an accountant.

Machinery and equipment. If additional machinery and equipment will be needed—either to replace old equipment or to meet new resource requirements—you have several acquisition options, such as purchasing, renting, leasing, custom hiring, or exchanging labor for access to equipment (Figure 64).

If you plan to purchase additional equipment, you should also consider the advantages of buying new versus used equipment. The financial, labor, and production-related advantages and disadvantages of new versus used equipment are outlined in Figure 65. Think about these issues as well as your ability or willingness to perform equipment repairs and to finance large capital purchases.

As you brainstorm machinery and equipment acquisition options, it’s a good idea to talk with other farmers, equipment dealers and competitors about their experiences. The Minars conducted research about equipment alternatives by visiting with other farmers in person and on the phone. They traveled around the state of Minnesota and as far as West Virginia to visit other on-farm dairy processing operations.

Based on their conversations with other on-farm processors, the Minars decided to pursue the use of new equipment from Pladot, an equipment manufacturer located in Israel. The Pladot Mini-Dairy system can be sized according to the Minar’s milk production capacity. Moreover, Pladot provides training, technical support and product recipes as part of the Mini-Dairy equipment package. They felt that by purchasing the turn-key processing system from Pladot, they would be able to produce a range of quality products from their first batch of processed milk. They were concerned that their other alternative, purchasing used equipment, would risk difficulties in locating and fitting equipment, in getting the system up and running efficiently, and in developing their own recipes. 4 TASK 140 BUILDING A SUSTAINABLE BUSINESS 40Analyzing Land Investments, Business Management in Agriculture videotape series, Willett, 1988. .......