--- Develop a Strategic Human Resources Plan ---

should include a short- and long-term back-up plan to arrange for management in the case of an emergency due to illness or shift in goals on the part of management team members. A written management plan can be particularly useful, and may become a final part of your business plan if you decide to manage as a team. Management teams and boards often use written management plans to clearly specify management responsibilities, check-in meeting dates, and a description of grievance procedures.

Develop a Strategic Human Resources Plan Briefly summarize your human resources strategy for each enterprise or the whole farm (if appropriate) using the space in Worksheet 4.23: Human Resources Strategy Summary. Carefully review your research, and describe workforce needs and plans for filling them. Note the strengths, weaknesses, opportunities and threats (SWOT) associated with each strategy. This also is a good time to list human resources expense estimates for each enterprise.

You will use this information when you evaluate the feasibility of each strategy alternative.

Financial Strategy Financially successful businesses are usually built around strategies that incorporate risk management, tax-efficient organization, and careful use of financing.

In this section you will build a financial strategy by looking at: • Risk: What does our future business environment look like and how will we manage for risk? • Organization: How will we legally organize and structure the business? • Financing: How will we finance capital requirements?

Benefits Taxes Insurance Other Business Plan Input - Human Resources Strategy Summary:

Our business strategy includes the creation of seven new jobs to market and process our milk: two full-time pro- cessing plant staff positions, one full-time plant manager position, one full-time marketing management position, one full-time delivery management/staff position, one part-time book keeping position, and one quarter-time technician staff position. Salaries and wages will be competitive with industry standards. Eventually, we plan to offer health care and vacation benefits for full-time staff.

We have children with many abilities and envision this business as a future for them and their families. We plan to fill most of our labor needs - including management positions - internally with family labor. We feel that the use of family labor is a great strength - our kids know the business well and are familiar with one another’s skills and work style. Our children have participated in all of our visioning sessions and have a long-term, vested interest in seeing the processing business succeed. Of course, one disadvantage of hiring family members is that family or personal conflicts have the potential to affect the business.

Each family member will be trained in at least two positions so that we have backup for vacation or illness and injury. We will communicate daily as needed and through quarterly meetings with our Board of Advisors. 4 TASK 154 BUILDING A SUSTAINABLE BUSINESS Figure 75.

Excerpt from Cedar Summit Farm’s Worksheet 4.23:  Human Resources Strategy Summary .......

The Four Key Management Areas: • Marketing • Operations • Human Resources ; Finance