--- the Business Planning Guide. Definitions for the glossary ---

Budget: an itemized list of all estimated revenue that a given business anticipates receiving along with a list of all estimated costs and expenses that will be incurred in obtaining the above mentioned income during a given period of time. A budget is typically for one business cycle, such as a year, or for several cycles.

Business continuation agreement: a written contract between the business’ buyer and seller that describes how the business transfer will take place. This is also called a “buy/sell agreement.” Business plan: a written plan used to chart a new or ongoing business’ strategies, sales projections, and key personnel in order to obtain financing or to provide a strategic foundation on which a business can grow.

Capital: the total amount of money or other resources owned or used to acquire future income or benefits.

Cash accounting: an accounting basis in which revenue and expenses are recorded in the period they are actually received or expended in cash. Use of the cash basis generally is not considered to be in conformity with generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP) and is therefore used only in selected situations, such as for very small businesses and (when permitted) for income tax reporting.

Cash flow statement: measures the business’ ability to meet its obligations with internally generated cash.

Certification: a process used to ensure that each producer or handler of organic food or fiber meets industry certification standards for production, processing and handling.

Certification agent: any company, organization or government body that offers the service of organic certi fication.

Collaborative marketing group (CMG): a group of farmers who have agreed to work together over an extended period of time to collectively market the agricultural products they produce. A cooperative is the most common type of a CMG.

The following glossary is a partial listing of terms used in the Business Planning Guide. Definitions for the glossary terms were drawn from a number of sources including:

Business Plan: A State of the Art Guide, FINPACK Manual, OCIA International’s 2001 International Certification Standards, Marketing Dictionary, A Guide to Starting a Business in Minnesota, and USDA 2000 Fact Book.

Account receivable: a current asset representing money due for services performed or merchandise sold on credit.

Accrual accounting: revenue and expenses are recorded in the period in which they are earned or incurred regardless of whether cash is received or disbursed in that period. This is the accounting basis that is generally required to be used to conform with generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP) in preparing financial statements for external users.

Advertising: how businesses inform and persuade potential and current customers using paid announcements carried by mass media such as newspapers, magazines, television and radio stations, and Internet web sites.

Advertising reach: number of individuals or households exposed to an ad.

Asset: anything owned by an individual or a business, that has commercial or exchange value. Assets may consist of specific property or claims against others, in contrast to obligations due others.

Audit trail: a comprehensive system of documentation that verifies the integrity of organic products and ingredients from production through harvest, storage, transport, processing, handling and sales.

Balance sheet: an itemized list of assets and liabilities for the business to portray its net worth at a given moment in time—usually at the beginning of each year.

Break-even point: the volume point at which revenues and costs are equal; a combination of sales and costs that will yield a no profit/no loss operation.

Glossary 257 BUILDING A SUSTAINABLE BUSINESS Glossary