--- Planning Task One: ---

Development.
How to Really Create a Successful Business Plan.
David E. Gumpert. Boston Inc. Magazine Publishing. 1994.
Making Your Small Farm Profitable. Ron Macher and
Howard W. Kerr Jr., Storey Books. 1999.
Strategic Farm/Ranch Planning and Marketing.
Sustainable Agriculture Research and Education (SARE)
National Continuing Education Program. 2009.
Succession Planner. Linda Kirk Fox. University of Idaho
Cooperative Extension System. 1997. Publication number:
CIS 1058.
Agencies, Organizations and Networks
Agricultural Utilization Research Institute (AURI).
Grants available to fund business plan development,
product development, and market research. Assists with
the development of business and marketing plans.
Minnesota Dairy Business Planning Grant Program.
Grants available to partially cover costs associated with
the development of business planning for dairy producers.
Minnesota Small Business Development Centers.
Provides business owners with financial and technical
assistance as well as information about licenses, permits
and targeting market segments.
NxLEVEL Courses. Provides training curriculums for
starting and existing businesses. Topics covered include
micro-businesses, alternative agriculture, e-business, and
doing business abroad or in the U.S.
Planning Task One:
Identify Values
Publications
Upper Midwest Organic Resource Directory. Available
from Midwest Organic and Sustainable Education Services
(MOSES).
Keep in mind that web site addresses change
frequently. Some resources are specific to Minnesota
or the Upper Midwest. Contact your local University
Extension Service or state Department of Agri
culture to see if similar programs exist in your state.
General Business Planning
Publications, Software and Videos
AgPlan. University of Minnesota, Center for Farm
Financial Management.

The Business Plan: A State-of-the-Art Guide. Michael
O’Donnell. Center for Innovation, University of North
Dakota.
The Complete Holistic Management Planning and
Monitoring Guide. Allan Savory Center for Holistic
Management.
Developing a Longer-Range Strategic Farm Business
Plan. Part One of planned six part series: Business
Management for Farmers. Ken Thomas. Midwest Plan
Services, Iowa State University, Ames, IA. 1999.
Publication number: NCR-610A.
Economic and Business Principles in Farm Planning
and Production. Sydney C. James and Phillip R. Eberle.
Iowa State University Press. 2000.
Farming Alternatives: A Guide to Evaluating the
Feasibility of New Farm-Based Enterprises. Nancy
Grudens Schuck, Wayne Knoblauch, Judy Green and
Mary Saylor. 1988. Natural Resource, Agriculture, and
Engineering Service, Cornell University. 1988. Publication
number: NRAES-32.
FINPACK Business Planning Software. Center for Farm
Financial Management.
A Guide to Starting a Business in Minnesota. Charles
A. Schaffer, Madeline Harris, and Ann M. Wilczynski
(editors). Minnesota Small Business Assistance
Office. Minnesota Department of Trade and Economic
Resources
249
BUILDING A SUSTAINABLE BUSINESS
Resources