--- Dave and Florence ---

your operations. Use Worksheet 2.4: Institu tional Considerations to record the important existing institutional restrictions that must be considered in developing your operations plan. These include long-term leasing arrangements for land and other real estate, as well as any leases in effect with state and federal agencies. It is also important to note any long-term contracts for marketing crop and livestock products, whether they represent an opportunity to market or a commitment that must be fulfilled.

Dave and Florence Minar used Worksheet 2.4:

Institutional Considerations, to record information about their lease for 65 acres of neighboring cropland and the 30-year living snow fence easement they recently signed. They also noted that they have a temporary feedlot permit that will be good until 2010. Since these institutional considerations will be in effect for many years to come, the Minars didn’t need to be concerned about being forced to make major changes in their grass-based dairy operation in the near future.

Worksheet Institutional Considerations 2.4 Describe institutional factors that currently affect your ability to use and manage physical resources. Include any longterm leasing arrangements, conservation easements, permit requirements, legal restrictions, production or marketing contracts.

Long-term Leasing Arrangements for Real Estate (specify whether items are leased in for your use or leased out for the use of others) Long-term Agreements and Easements Permit and Legal Restrictions (specify the agency responsible for issuing permits, conditions and compliance factors, fees, and your ability to meet these conditions) Long-term Production Contracts and Marketing Agreements We have a ten-year lease on 65 acres of neighboring cropland planted to hay.

We signed a 30-year living snow fence easement in the winter of 2001 with the Scott County Highway Department and the local Soil and Water Conservation Service office. The land will be planted in trees provided by the SWCS office.

We have a temporary feedlot permit from the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency. It is good for ten years and was obtained in 2000.

None – we do not have a legal contract with our milk cooperative. 2 TASK 41 BUILDING A SUSTAINABLE BUSINESS Figure 10.

Example from Cedar Summit Farm—Worksheet 2.4:  Institutional Considerations