--- Frank Foltz, owner of Northwind ---

“Applegate Farms is working to improve the meat Americans eat . . . All of our products are gluten-free, contain low or no carbohydrates, are lower in fat than other major brands and free of all taste or texture enhancers” —Applegate Farms Research other business messages online, in advertisements, or at the grocery store.

Tools and delivery. Frank Foltz, owner of Northwind Nursery and Orchards, promotes his business’ products using a range of promotional tools, including fact sheets that are distributed at farmers’ markets and educational on-farm displays. “Quality products and knowledgeable, personal service along with a series of informative fact sheets on fruit growing culture and problems are an integral part of our catalog sales strategy,” says Frank. “Those, along with on-farm learning opportunities, community activities and cultural events are the back-bone of our local promotions efforts.” The Foltzes’ experience suggests that educational fact sheets are one of the best ways to reach their target market customer—individuals interested in learning more about backyard orcharding and edible landscaping.

Promotion or advertising tools typically include display ads, billboards, yellow pages, mailings, flyers and catalogues. Your state Department of Agriculture likely has a program promoting locally grown products. The Minne sota Grown Directory is an excellent advertising resource for farmers in Minnesota and Wisconsin who have seasonal and year-round products to sell.

Minnesota Grown program participants, like the Minars, are listed in an annual directory and receive permission to use the trademarked Minnesota Grown logo (see “Resources”).

Every advertising tool has its advantages and disadvantages. Think about which tools will help you best reach your target market. Once you’ve developed a list of potential advertising tools, think about where you will deliver or distribute your promotional message.

Trade shows, farmers’ markets, county 4 TASK 129 BUILDING A SUSTAINABLE BUSINESS Figure 54. 1998 Educational Classes from Northwind Nursery Catalogue Figure 55.

Cedar Summit Farm price list with Minnesota Grown logo posted at their farm stand Gigi DiGiacomo