--- Inventory and Storage Management: How will we store ---

Your communication strategy might also incorporate feedback elements to obtain information from customers. Frank Foltz describes this strategy approach best in his business plan: “We will treat our customers as an extension of our research and development departments. Their problems and complaints about our products can help us eliminate future production problems and their suggestions may be as helpful as any hired consultant. We will listen attentively to their concerns, dealing with problems immediately and always give the customer the benefit of the doubt.” Regardless of the promotional strategy you pursue, you and your planning team will need to be creative to catch the attention of your customers and stretch your advertising dollars. Promotion, though seemingly overwhelming, should be fun.

Return to Worksheet 4.7: Promotion to sketch a promotional strategy and advertising plan for each of your products. Think about your values and goals as well as your target market, product and potential competition. Like the Minars, be sure to detail your overall promotional strategy, message, advertising tools, delivery ideas and communication plans.

Inventory and Storage Management: How will we store inventory and maintain product quality?

Storage and inventory management are integral and important parts any business strategy, affecting product quality, marketing opportunities, and the business’ legal standing. While this may seem to be more of an operations issue, many marketing strategies may depend on whether or how long you can store your product.

What role will inventory and storage management play in your business?

Like traditional grain producers who use storage as a way to mitigate seasonal price declines, Riverbend Farm owner Greg Reynolds devoted a substantial portion of his operations research toward the development of a low-cost storage system for organic vegetables. He sought to preserve his produce and prolong his marketing season.

You might shape your storage strategy around marketing or to satisfy regulatory considerations. Certified organic producers, for example, must maintain detailed storage and harvest records in order to market their crops.

Similarly, in accordance with the USDA Pasteurized Milk Ordinance and the Minnesota Department of Agriculture Food Handlers License/Processing Plant Permit, the Minars are required to test all milk transported to Cedar Summit Creamery for traces of antibiotics, bacteria and proper pasteurization once it 4 TASK 131 BUILDING A SUSTAINABLE BUSINESS ........