--- Prepare the Strategy Section ---

184 BUILDING A SUSTAINABLE BUSINESS Prepare the Strategy Section of Your Business Plan The work that you’ve done in this Planning Task is very much about the planning process. But the culmination of all of your work is the development of a very specific business strategy. This strategy, along with the research that supports it, will become the crux of your written business plan. Take time now to summarize your business strategy for the whole farm.

One way to do this is to draft the Executive Summary for your business plan—to summarize your principal business planning objective, goals, and your strategy (or strategies) for reaching them. Authors of The Executive Summary say “The executive summary is, perhaps, the most important section of your written business plan since many readers, including lenders, will not look beyond the executive summary if it does not communicate careful planning and promise.” 73 An Executive Summary typically includes information about the business: • Identity: Who you are (and the name of your business). • Location: Where the business is located. • History: How long the business has been in operation. • Ownership: Current ownership structure. • Industry and Competition: Brief description of the business’ competitive position. • Product: What type of product you now offer and plan to market in the future. • Marketing: Who your potential customers are and what they will value. • Operations: How you will produce. • Human Resources: Who will manage and staff the business. • Finances: How much profit and equity the business will generate, how you intend to finance the business and how you will cope with and manage risk.

The Executive Summary is a snapshot of your business and its strategy.

It can be as short as you like but generally no longer than two pages. Most importantly, your Executive Summary should convey credibility and excitement, particularly if you are seeking external financing or new business partners. As an example, the Executive Summary prepared by Dave and Florence Minar for Cedar Summit Farm is reproduced in Figure 98. Look at how they incorporated information about their values, vision, research, and financial analysis into a concise, positive and realistic summary of their strategy to process milk on the farm. 73The Executive Summary, in Business Owners’ Toolkit online, CCH Incorporated, 2002.

The executive summary is, perhaps, the most important section of your written business plan since many readers, including lenders, will not look beyond the executive summary if it does not communicate careful planning and promise. 4 TASK