--- Planning for Contingencies ---

4 TASK 183 BUILDING A SUSTAINABLE BUSINESS 72Planning for Contingencies, in Business Owners’ Toolkit online, CCH Incorporated, 2002. fall back on should marketing prices, labor supplies, family goals, and institutional requirements change unexpectedly. It can also be used to guide discussions about when best to “get out” of the business if too many strategies fail.

Authors of Planning for Contingencies note that there are several ways to incorporate contingency plans into your final business plan: “For example, your financial statements can incorporate a footnote explaining that the projected interest rate can go up by as much as three percent before your profit margin is seriously affected. Or, your discussion of how many employees you’ll need can state that an additional production person will be hired when sales of $X are achieved.”72 Begin your contingency planning by identifying events that may throw your strategy off track and necessitate a major change in your business plan—like a change in government policy, market prices, organic certification rules. The Minars, for instance, identified new competition—other farmers or businesses that begin offering non-homogenized or glass-bottled milk—as a source of uncertainty.

Their contingency plan could include a number of ideas, such as “frequent customer” discounts, for coping with increased competition. Conversely, the Minars’ contingency plan might include plans to cope with labor and production constraints should home delivery sales exceed their expectations. If for example, 150 customers—rather than the projected 75—sign up for home delivery during the Minars’ first three months of processing, how would they respond? Additional milk would be available for processing, but Dave and Florence might need to hire and train new staff to fill orders or risk losing potential customers.

As stated earlier, your contingency plan need not be complicated. You simply need to show that you have thought through and planned for a range of future scenarios. Take a look at the contingency plan prepared by Greg Reynolds, owner of Riverbend Farm: “If CSA sales do not materialize, I will sell the produce to restaurants and co-ops.

The lack of up-front money will delay the plans to build a root cellar. The need for help and a cooler are crucial to expanding the business. Without the CSAs, weekly sales [to restaurants and co-ops] will have to reach $1,000/week [in order to meet financial goals]. That is about 40 cases per week, harvesting two cases per hour per person or 20 hours of additional labor.” Moreover, your contingency plan should include some parameters that define when it may be time to exit the busines or “cut your losses” should market or personal conditions change dramatically. In this case you should have some idea how to repay investors, for example, and address tax consequences. Lenders, lawyers and business partners may be able to help prepare this section of your contingency plan. What are your contingency plans for the business?

Take some time to discuss with your planning team how internal and external conditions may change in the future. Then use Worksheet 4.39: Contingency Statement to develop a brief contingency plan for the business.