--- Choose the Best Whole ---

a livestock expansion where the inventories are being built up during the first year but no cash sales occur.

Use Worksheet 4.37: Transitional Cash Flow to record your income and expenses during the transition period. You’ll find some of this information on Worksheet 4.31 (Enterprise Budget) where you first recorded expenses.

Figure 95, on the preceding page, shows a summary of the hog producer’s transitional cash flow plan for the first three years of on-farm farrowing. Note that this plan projects that it will take three years before the business will begin to show a positive cash flow. If the hog producer decides to go ahead with her hoop house purchase and farrowing enterprise, she will have to subsidize the business through cash reserves or operating credit during the transition.

There is software available to help you develop transitional cash flow information. The Center for Farm Financial Management’s FINFLO component of FINPACK and most similar software will walk you through a monthly cash flow projection for the next year and then, if need be, push that forward for one or two more years (see “Resources”).

Choose the Best Whole Farm Strategy After all of the brainstorming, analysis and discussion, the final component of strategy formulation is to make a decision—choose a future direction and then implement it. At the end of this section, you will need to make a decision to: • Stay with the business base plan (make no changes in business). • Adopt the alternative strategy (implement your new plan). • Reconsider or brainstorm new alternatives.

If you have done a complete job of laying the foundation and evaluating strategic alternatives, this may be the easiest part. If, for example, you identified a strategic direction that is in tune with your values, moves you toward your personal and family goals, and is technically and financially feasible, it will probably be easy to make this final decision and to get everyone in your family or business on board.

If your decision about which business strategy to pursue is not so clear, you may want to do some more research or explore additional strategy alternatives. 4 TASK 179 BUILDING A SUSTAINABLE BUSINESS