--- worksheets for Task Four. ---

are tied to a set of values concerning family, environment and community that have grown through time. Their challenge in this Planning Task was to develop a whole farm strategy that, over the course of five, ten or more years, would live up to their values—a strategy that would move them toward their goals, by taking advantage of current business strengths and perceived market opportunities.

If you have completed the Worksheets for the preceding Planning Tasks, then you have already laid the foundation for strategic planning. Your job in Planning Task Four is to begin building a whole farm strategic plan for your future on top of that foundation.

In Planning Task Four you will: • Develop a business strategy. • Evaluate strategic alternatives. • Decide on a whole farm strategic course of action. • Develop contingency plans. • Develop the strategic section of your business plan.

Business strategies are realistic actions that communicate how you plan to reach your goals. There are an endless number of potential strategies that can be developed for each functional area of the business or the farm as a whole.

Your task will be to narrow the list of possibilities to those marketing, opera tions, human resources and financial strategies that best address your critical planning needs, and are compatible with your values, vision and goals. A simple rule of thumb to follow when developing strategies is to take advantage of your business’ internal strengths. “A farm’s strategy ought to be grounded in what it is good at doing (i.e., its strengths and competitive capabilities).”12 We suggest beginning your strategy research and development with the functional area that most clearly addresses your critical planning need or whole farm strategy idea. Then move on to the other functional areas. Dave and Florence Minar began their strategy research with human resources. They took a look at how on-farm processing might address their critical planning need to provide new jobs and income for family members. They then studied the market to gauge sales potential and competition while simultaneously researching equipment options and processing capacity. The last thing they developed was a financial strategy.

As you research and develop your business strategies, you will consider many of the same marketing, operations, human resources and finance questions that you first considered when you assessed your current situation in Planning Task Two. This time around involves more research. You will answer these same questions, using educated guesses rather than actual experience. 4 TASK 104 BUILDING A SUSTAINABLE BUSINESS 12A Strategic Management Primer for Farmers, Olson, 2001.

See pages 186–231 for a complete set of blank worksheets for Task Four. ; To print a complete set of blank worksheets, go to http://purl.umn.edu/115840 Business strategies are realistic actions that communicate how you plan to reach your goals.