--- Human Resources Strategy ---

The Minars summarized their operations strategy on Worksheet 4.17, as shown in Figure 69.

As you draft a whole-farm operations summary, be sure to include supporting research and note the strengths, weaknesses, opportunities and threats (SWOT) associated with each strategy alternative.

You will use this information in the next section to evaluate the feasibility of each strategy alternative and to settle on a final course of action for the business. It’s also a good idea to have each planning team member summarize a whole farm operations strategy and work through a SWOT analysis on their own. Then you can compare notes and brainstorm about internal and external threats, and make sure everyone agrees on which overall operations plan you will pursue.

Human Resources Strategy Labor and management are important to the success of any business— particularly family farm businesses. Working together, managing each other, making key decisions collectively all can be challenging when you not only work together but live together. These challenges grow when a major change in business strategy is involved—when the roles of managers, family members, and employees can shift from production management to marketing management for instance.

In this section, you and your planning team will begin to build a human resources strategy to address your changing management and work force needs.

This strategy should embrace your family goals while meeting new business needs.

You will begin your strategic planning by answering questions about: • Labor needs: What are our future workforce needs? • Skills: What skills will be required to fill workforce needs? • Gaps: How will we fill workforce gaps? • Compensation: How will we pay family and members of our workforce? • Management and communication: Who will manage the business and how?

Land Other Total expenses Business Plan Input - Operations Strategy Summary:

Our operations strategy is to eventually process all of our milk on the farm. We will begin by processing 30 per- cent of our milk in November 2001 and increase production by five percent each month until all milk from our current-size dairy herd is processed into milk, butter, and other cream-top products.

We will need to build a processing plant on the farm and will most likely acquire processing equipment new from Pladot. There are several advantages of going with the new Pladot Mini-Dairy system: 1. Their equipment can be sized to our operation; 2. Pladot will supply all technical training and product recipes so that we can process a full line of dairy products right away instead of experimenting on our own, one product at a time; and 3. We will have a turn-key system up and running almost immediately.

The only disadvantage of going with the new equipment is cost - we will have to explore financing alternatives and cash flow. 4 TASK 145 BUILDING A SUSTAINABLE BUSINESS Figure 69.

Excerpt from Cedar Summit Farm’s Worksheet 4.17:  Operations Strategy Summary ........

The Four Key Management Areas: • Marketing • Operations ; Human Resources • Finance