--- Undifferentiated Commodity Pricing Strategies ---

Common pricing strategies for undifferentiated (raw) commodities (with low price setting ability) are discussed in Figure 49.

Traditional commodity pricing strategies also have their advantages and disadvantages as described in Figure 49. When considering each of the commodity pricing strategies, remember that there are many factors that can affect your overall market price strategy, such as storage capacity, cash flow and taxes.31 Whatever type of pricing strategy you choose, think through your rationale. Are you trying to undermine the competition by offering a lower price? Set a high price that reflects your quality image or market demand as is the present case with organic products? Are you simply looking to cover costs and reduce volatility?

The Minars identified two pricing strategies for bottled milk (relative and cost-based pricing) to help place their product in retail and wholesale markets. By introducing new customers to Cedar Summit Creamery’s “old fashioned” bottled milk at a price well below that of organic milk, the Minars hoped to encourage quality and health-conscious shoppers to try their product. The Minars’ break-even analysis in the evaluation step of this Planning Task helped them determine whether or not a relative or cost-oriented pricing strategy would be financially feasible.

Use Worksheet 4.6: Pricing to develop your pricing strategy for each product. Begin by recording research about competitor’s prices. 4 TASK 124 BUILDING A SUSTAINABLE BUSINESS 31Marketing Strategies for Agricultural Commodities, Weness, 2001 (reviewed). 32Ibid.

Advance pricing prior to harvest. The advantage of pricing your commodity prior to harvest is the ability to lock in a price that ideally returns your cost of production plus a profit. The primary disadvantage of forward pricing or futures contract pricing has to do with harvested yield and market prices. You will need to be careful when making commitments so that you are not obligated to deliver more than you can safely produce.

Extension Educator Erlin Weness suggests forward pricing your crop in staggered amounts to protect against crop failure and other disasters. There are several tools available to price your grain forward, including futures and options and hedge-to-arrive contracts.

Cash pricing at harvest. This strategy is quite simple—it involves selling your crop directly from the field at harvest. This puts you at the most financial risk, by forcing you to sell your commodity at the time of harvest when prices are likely to be low.

Delayed pricing after harvest. This strategy involves delivering your commodity after harvest or storing it and then pricing. The most common post-harvest pricing tools include basis contracts, hedge-to-arrive contracts, forward contracts, delayed pricing, and the government loan program.

Figure 49.

Undifferentiated Commodity Pricing Strategies32