--- Functional Areas: Operations ---

Grazing Systems Planning Guide. Kevin Blanchet,
Howard Moechnig, and Jodi Dejong-Hughes. University of
Minnesota Extension. 2000. C
Integrated Pest Management. Rex Dufour and Janet
Bachmann. ATTRA - National Sustainable Agriculture
Information Service. March 1998.
Making the Transition to Sustainable Farming. Burt
Hall and George Kuepper. ATTRA - National Sustainable
Agriculture Information Service. December 1997.
Managing Production and Marketing Systems. Part
three of a planned six-part series: Business Management
for Farmers. Midwest Plan Services, Iowa State
University, Ames, IA. July 2000. Publication number:
NCR-610C.
Managing Your Land for Wildlife: Opportunities for
Farmers and Rural Land Owners. Gigi DiGiacomo,
Les Everett, James Kitts, and Kevin Lines. University of
Minnesota Extension Service. 1998. Publication number:
FO-7067-S.
Minnesota Guide to Organic Certification. Jim Riddle
and Lisa Gulbranson. 2007. MISA and University of
Minnesota Extension. Publication number: DC8497.
Overview of Agroforestry. Alice Beetz. ATTRA -
National Sustainable Agriculture Information Service.
October 1999.
Overview of Organic Crop Production. George Kuepper.
ATTRA - National Sustainable Agriculture Information
Service. November 2000.
Overview of Organic Fruit Production. Guy K. Ames
and George Kuepper. ATTRA - National Sustainable
Agriculture Information Service. February 2000.
Rotational Grazing. Alice E. Beetz. ATTRA - National
Sustainable Agriculture Information Service. 1999.
The Season Extension Topic Room. An online
collection of season extension materials maintained by
Sustainable Agriculture Research and Education (SARE).

Sharing the Harvest: A Guide to Community Supported
Agriculture. Elizabeth Henderson with Robyn Van En.
Chelsea Green Publishing Company, Vermont. 1999.

Sustainable Agriculture. John Mason. Kangaroo Press.
1997.
Sustainable Corn and Soybean Production. Preston
Sullivan. ATTRA - National Sustainable Agriculture
Information Service. 2000.
Sustainable Soil Management. Preston Sullivan.
ATTRA - National Sustainable Agriculture Information
of Agriculture.
Natural/Organic Industry Outlook. George Southworth.
Cooperative Grocer. September-October 2001. Number 96.
New Markets for Producers: Selling to Retail Stores.
Center for Integrated Agricultural Systems. 1999.
Research Brief number: 38.
Resources for Organic Marketing. Holly Born. ATTRA -
National Sustainable Agriculture Information Service.
Agencies, Organizations and Networks
Agricultural Marketing Service (AMS), USDA. Includes
six commodity programs—Cotton, Dairy, Fruit and
Vegetable, Livestock and Seed, Poultry, and Tobacco.
Programs employ specialists who provide standardization,
grading, and market news services for these commodities.
Also oversee marketing agreements and orders,
administer research and promotion programs, and
purchase commodities for Federal food programs.
Association of Official Seed Certifying Agencies
(AOSCA). International organization dedicated to identity-
preserved seed certification.
Agricultural Utilization and Research Institute (AURI).
Assists with the development and financing of marketing
plans.
Cooperative Development Services (CDS). Develops
marketing plans for cooperatives on a fee-for-service
basis.
Local Harvest. Finds locally grown produce and other
products such as CSAs and Farmers Markets anywhere in
the United States.
Minnesota Grown. Partnership between the Minnesota
Department of Agriculture and farmers that produces and
distributes a directory of Minnesota-grown products.
US Department of Agriculture (USDA), Department
of Rural Development. Provides technical and financial
assistance for marketing research.
Functional Areas: Operations
Publications, Software, Videos and Websites
Alternative Agronomic Crops. Patricia Sauer and
Preston Sullivan. ATTRA - National Sustainable
Agriculture Information Service. 2000.
Crop Rotation on Organic Farms: A Planning
Manual. Charles L. Mohler and Sue Ellen Johnson,
editors. 2009. Sustainable Agriculture Research and
Education (SARE) and Natural Resource, Agriculture and
Engineering Service (now PALS Publishing).
Resources
252
BUILDING A SUSTAINABLE BUSINESS