--- Machinery Acquisition Options ---

Used machinery and equipment.

Purchasing used equipment requires relatively low up-front investment costs. However, used equipment is generally less dependable than new equipment, hence labor, repair, lubrication and fuel costs are usually higher than for new machinery and equipment.

Ultimately, this means that buying used equipment results in higher variable costs for the business.

New machinery and equipment.

New equipment is typically more efficient and convenient and may include training or technical assistance. As a trade-off, however, new equipment can be more expensive up front, requiring larger capital investments, insurance, interest costs and depreciation. 4 TASK 141 BUILDING A SUSTAINABLE BUSINESS Full ownership. Ownership is the most common method of acquiring long- term control of farm machinery. Ownership advantages include control over the machine’s use and scheduling. The disadvantages of full ownership include responsibility for machine operation, repairs, maintenance, liquidation and obsolescence, and capital investments.

Joint ownership. Joint ownership is becoming more and more common as a way to distribute responsibility for investment costs, repairs, and labor among two or more businesses. However, cooperation is essential.

Equipment use must be coordinated and capital payments made in a timely manner. Problems can arise when the parties involved do not share a simi lar work and finance ethic. Written agreements are highly recommended.

Exchange work. Machinery exchange among neighbors is one of the oldest forms of farm machinery acquisition on a short-term basis. Two or more farmers working together to share labor and equipment can reduce their individual investments in machinery while giving each access to a complete system. Exchange work is still a common method of machinery acquisition among young or beginning farmers who need machinery and an older neighbor who requires labor. As with joint ownership, a working agreement is very important to determine whose farm is serviced first and who pays for repair costs.

Custom hire. Under traditional custom hire arrangements, the farm operator or landowner hires a custom operator to do one or more field operations. The custom operator provides the machinery, labor and fuel and agrees to perform specified duties at predetermined costs. Today, however, custom farming (the landowner hires a custom operator to perform most or all field operations) is gaining more interest. Under this arrangement, the landowner usually pays all cash costs, including seed and fertilizer. If you are considering a custom farming arrangement, you will need to specify the following in a written agreement: location and acreage involved, custom services required, landowner obligations, provisions for default, and a schedule of custom rates and a payment plan.

Rental. Rental usually takes place for a short, specified period. In this case, the farm owner rents a particular piece of machinery and performs all required work. The renter is responsible for daily maintenance of the machinery. Generally, there are two rental options—pure rental and rental purchase. If you are considering a rental arrangement, be sure to review the terms of each option.

Leasing. Unlike rental, leasing allows the farm business owner to gain access to machinery over a long period of time, such as 5-7 years. The advantage of the lease arrangement, from a cash flow perspective, is that payments are typically less than payments on borrowed money to own the machine. Leasing also carries its disadvantages. Often the lease payment schedule extends beyond a debt payment schedule and therefore the total amount paid for the machine usually exceeds the full ownership cost.

Moreover, by leasing, it is often more difficult to enforce warranty claims against the lessor or dealer.

Figure 64.

Machinery Acquisition Options41 Figure 65.

New Versus Used Machinery and Equipment 42 41Acquiring and Managing Resources for the Farm Business, Thomas, 2001. 42Ibid.