--- Develop a Financial ---

4
TASK
155
BUILDING A SUSTAINABLE BUSINESS
When you evaluate your strategic plan, you will have the opportunity to
evaluate enterprise and whole farm strategies from a financial perspective by
looking at projected profitability, liquidity and solvency. For now, however,
concentrate on the development of risk management, organization and finance
strategies.
As you do so, recall your financial values and goals. What is important to
you? Paying down debt? Putting money away for the future? Being able to save
for “down times”? Reducing overall financial risk? Generating most or all of
your income from the farm business? Use your values and goals along with your
SWOT assessment to guide the development of one or more whole farm financial
strategies.
Risk management: How will we manage risk?
In today’s farm economy, risk management has become an important topic,
particularly for those producers who have traditionally relied on government
intervention to mitigate price and production-related uncertainties. Regardless of
whether you produce corn, soybeans, grass-based milk, organic vegetables or specialty
fruit trees, risk management will be an important component of your business plan.
Without it, uncontrolled risk and uncertainty reduce the reliability of financial
projections and make investment analysis difficult. Unmanaged risk and uncertainty
also carry with them a high degree of stress for farm managers and their families. In
this section, you and your planning team will first research the potential business risks
that stem from new marketing, operations and human resources strategies. Then you
will be ready to develop a whole farm risk management strategy (or combination of
strategies) to minimize and protect against future uncertainty.
As described in Planning Task Two, farm businesses, particularly family farm
businesses, often are exposed to many forms of risk: personal risk, production risk,
market risk, institutional risk and financial risk.54 What type of risk will your business
be exposed to in the future as you look at new products, farm management systems,
and labor strategies? How will you manage this new risk? Common risk management
strategies are to: minimize production- and market-related risk; transfer risk outside of
the business; and build internal capacity to bear risk financially.
Production- and market-related risk management alternatives include enterprise
diversification, cultural production practices (irrigation, short season crop varieties),
hedging with futures and options, and storage.
Risk transfer outside the business can be done by purchasing insurance
(crop, property, health, home, liability), signing production or sales contracts, and
participating in government programs.
54Managing Risk in Farming: Concepts, Research
and Analysis, Harwood, et al., 1999.
Develop a Business Strategy
;Develop a Financial

Strategy

Risk Management

Organizational Structure

Finance

Develop a Strategic

Financial Plan