--- Page 262 ---

biological cycles and controls, sustain the economic viability of farm operations, and enhance the quality of life.

Synthetic: a substance that is formulated or manufactured by a chemical process or by a process that chemically changes a substance extracted from naturally occurring plant, animal, or mineral sources, except for those substances created by naturally occurring biological processes.

Target market: particular segment(s) of the market that the product is directed toward; the initial customers that you hope to win over.

Total approach advertising: combines both image and product promotion strategies.

Transition period: the time between the start of organic management and certification of the crop or livestock production system or site as organic (also called organic conversion period).

Value-added: creating new uses for or additional value to raw agricultural commodities through marketing, processing, and production.

Vegetative cover: trees or perennial grasses, legumes, or shrubs with an expected lifespan of five years or more.

Warehouser: an operator who receives and stores products, does not take legal title to the products, and does not open product containers, or mix, combine, or otherwise handle the products while in custody.

Watershed: the total land area, regardless of size, above a given point on a waterway that contributes runoff water to the flow at that point. A major subdivision of a drainage basin. The United States is generally divided into 18 major drainage areas and 160 principal river drainage basins containing some 12,700 smaller watersheds.

Wetlands: land that is characterized by an abundance of moisture and that is inundated by surface or ground water often enough to support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions.

Wholesaler: a business intermediary who either buys products or takes possession and acts as a commission merchant. organic certification include any information in written, visual, or electronic form that documents that the activities undertaken by producers, processors, handlers, inspectors, and certification agents comply with organic standards.

Repayment ability: the anticipated ability of a borrower to generate sufficient cash to repay a loan plus interest according to the terms established in the loan contract.

Retailer: a business intermediary, such as a grocery store, that may provide storage, logistical support, and advertising.

Retained earnings: the portion of net income that is retained within a business and added to net worth.

Risk: the possibility of adversity or loss; refers to uncertainty that matters.

S-Corporation: a type of corporation in which the owner holds 100 percent of the shares.

Segmentation: grouping customers into segments or sub-groups that share distinct similarities. Marketers commonly segment by geographics, demographics, and psychographics.

Shipper: a handler that is located at growing or other shipping points. A shipper sells products that it has grown or packed under its own name. A shipper may sell on behalf of growers or other shippers.

Sole proprietorship: a business that is owned and controlled by one individual.

Solvency: the business condition of financial viability in which net worth is positive; value of total assets exceeds debts Split operation: an operation that produces or handles nonorganic agricultural products in addition to agricultural products produced organically.

Standard of living: the measure of the quality of life in such areas as housing, food, education, clothing, and transportation.

Statement of cash flows: a financial statement presenting the cash receipts and cash payments over a specified period of time. The cash receipts and payments are separated into operating, investing, and financing activities.

Sustainable agriculture: an integrated system of plant and animal production practices having a site-specific application that will, over the long term, satisfy food and fiber needs, enhance environmental quality and natural resources, make the most efficient use of nonrenewable resources and on-farm resources, integrate natural Glossary 261 BUILDING A SUSTAINABLE BUSINESS