--- •	 Community Supported ---

4 TASK 115 BUILDING A SUSTAINABLE BUSINESS markets that they cannot reach? Are you better at working with people—at attracting and keeping customers? Do you have better business skills? In other words, what’s your niche? You may want to return to Worksheet 4.3 (Product Uniqueness) where you described your product to ask again, is our product truly unique?

Distribution and Packaging: How and when will we move our product to market?

Now that you have a customer and product in mind, your next task is to identify how to move or distribute products from your farm to the customer’s dinner table, store shelves, elevator or barn. Distribution strategies typically describe scope (market reach), movement, packaging and scheduling/handling.

Scope. The first component in your distribution strategy is scope—how widely you plan to distribute your product. Will you pursue an intensive, selective or exclusive distribution strategy?

Intensive product distribution typically involves widespread placement of your product at low prices. Your aim is to saturate the entire market for your goods. This strategy can be expensive and very competitive. Large-scale manufacturers or businesses that market nationwide often employ this method.

Selective product distribution involves selecting a small number of intermediaries, usually retailers, to handle your product. For example, if you plan to produce an upscale product, such as gourmet cheese, you may want to be selective about the stores that stock your product (choosing only those retailers who offer other gourmet, high-quality products).

Selective distribution offers the advantages of lower marketing costs and the ability to establish better working relationships with customers and intermediaries.

Exclusive distribution is, in effect, an extreme version of selective distribution. In this case, you grant exclusive stocking rights to a wholesaler or retailer. You agree not to sell to another buyer. In exchange, you might demand that the retailer stock only your farm’s salad greens, milk, meat or cheese. You may work closely with a retailer to set market prices, develop promotion strategies, and establish delivery schedules. Exclusive distribution carries promotional advantages, such as the creation of a prestige image for your product, and often involves reduced marketing costs. On the other hand, exclusive distribution may mean that you sacrifice some market share for your product.

Direct Marketing Distribution Alternatives: • Community Supported Agriculture (CSA) • Farmers’ markets • Home delivery service • Internet sales • Pick Your Own (PYO) • Mail order • Roadside stands Intermediary Distribution Alternatives: • Retailers • Wholesalers • Distributors • Brokers • Cooperatives .......