--- Direct Marketing Options ---

Movement. The most common
distribution strategies or channels for
moving your product to the final customer
are direct marketing and intermediary
marketing. Examples of each distribution
alternative are listed below.
Traditionally, farmers have
been positioned at the bottom of
the distribution channel—offering a
bulk commodity that required further
processing or packaging before it could
be sold to customers. Distribution
intermediaries, such as brokers and
cooperatives, were seen as the only
option for moving products from their
farm to the final customer. However, a
growing number of farmers today are
doing their own processing, packaging
and delivery. This adds value to their
raw product and helps them to retain a
greater share of the profit. As a result,
farmers have expanded their distribution
strategies to include direct marketing—
selling consumer goods such as goat
cheese, bundled fruit trees, or bottled
milk directly to the final customer.
In filling out Worksheet 4.5:
Distribution and Packaging, the Minars
identified two general distribution
strategies for their dairy products: direct
marketing (via farmers’ markets and
home delivery), and intermediary sales
(via traditional grocers and natural foods
cooperatives). As they continued the
planning process, the Minars focused
their research and evaluation on the
two distribution strategies with the
most potential for reaching each of their
market segments: home delivery to New
Prague households and sales to Twin
Cities Metro and New Prague retailers.
4
TASK
116
BUILDING A SUSTAINABLE BUSINESS
Community Supported Agriculture (CSA)
CSA organizations are similar to a cooperative in that you produce
for members. CSA members purchase annual shares of production at
the beginning of the year or season. In return, they receive weekly or
bi-monthly deliveries of fruits, vegetables, and/or livestock products.
CSA projects usually work best close to urban areas. Structures
vary and decisions are usually made based on group consensus. You
will need good people skills and may have to be creative to keep
customers from year to year.
Farmers’ Markets
Farmers’ markets are a relatively low-cost alternative if there is one
already operating in your area. You can plug right into an established
market (letting it do the promotion for you) and spend most of your
energies on production. Typically a full-year or a per market fee is
required to reserve stall space at farmers’ markets. The downside
is that you will be selling in a very competitive environment and you
will not be able to set higher prices.
Mail Order and Internet Sales
Mail order and Internet sales may be a good choice if you are not
close to a large urban area and if your product stores and ships
well. Perishable and heavy products are not good candidates. These
outlets are difficult to get started and work best if you can grow
them slowly while relying on other methods for the bulk of your
sales. Computerized records or high-quality Web site design are
important.

Pick Your Own (PYO)
PYO marketing is a relatively low-cost marketing option. It works
best for products in which ripeness is easily recognized. Often you
can charge a price that is similar to that for picked produce because
the consumer enjoys picking and will pay for the opportunity to do
so. Disadvantages include potential damage to the produce, liability
concerns, and the fact that a stretch of bad weather can dramatically
reduce sales when the product is ripe. Fruit and Christmas trees
are traditional examples of PYO enterprises. Fresh flowers are fast
becoming a favorite PYO product.
Roadside Stands
Roadside stands require a good location and cheap labor. The most
important ingredient to success is attracting repeat customers.
Quality, appearance and friendly service are important. Capital
requirements can be near nothing if you are in the right location, or
they can be substantial if you have to rent space. Check with local
authorities for legal requirements and regulations.
Figure 43.
Direct Marketing Options