--- Cooperative Development Services ---

based on the number of households/residents within 25-50 miles of their farm.17 This is how far customers typically travel to purchase something.

Cooperative Development Services representative Kevin Edberg says that as a general rule, 75 percent of direct market customers will live within 20 miles of your business.18 Using this rule of thumb, Edberg and author Ron Macher suggest a simple way to project direct market sales potential.

Begin by locating your farm on a county map and draw 25 and 50 mile radius circles around your farm. Count how many towns or cities fall within the circles. Using this map, add up the number of potential households that live in the nearby cities. These households represent your core potential business customers. Then, with a feel for the number of potential customers, estimate the potential value of sales per household. This is your sales potential. Begin by estimating the number of customers in each segment and projecting their weekly, monthly or annual purchases.

You can develop sales estimates from household or county purchasing records (available at your public library), from your own surveys, in person interviews, or from secondary sources, such as published purchasing pattern data. Excellent sources for consumer demographic and purchasing pattern data are CACI Market System Group Sourcebook, SRDS Lifestyle Market Analyst, and New Strategist Publications’ Household Spending: Who Spends How Much on What.

These are available in the reference section of your public library.

Use the space in Worksheet 4.2: Potential Sales Volume to begin developing sales estimates for each product that you plan to produce.

Worksheet 4.2 Complete this Worksheet for each major product you plan to produce. Use your information about average product con- sumption, geographic location, and customer preferences to develop simple sales projections for each segment of your market. Be sure to specify the timeframe (month, season, year) for each projection.You may want to calculate your poten- tial sales volume for best and worst case scenarios—adjusting the estimated sales volume per customer and the potential number of customers as market conditions may change. If you decide to look at more than three customer segments, more than one sales season, or best and worst case sales projections, use additional paper or Worksheets to calculate and record your business’ potential sales volume. Finally, describe any assumptions upon which your sales estimates are based.

Be sure to list data sources (such as surveys, market reports, sourcebooks, etc.).

Potential Sales Volume Product:

Time Frame:

Customer Segment: 1 2 3 Potential number of customers: (a) Estimated volume per customer (b) Potential sales volume (a x b) = Market Assumptions/Research Results Describe your marketing assumptions and research. Include information about general industry conditions, competition, and future market potential for your product.

Our research and assumptions are based on a survey that we did of New Prague residents and phone calls made to intermediaries (retail grocery stores). There are 5,000 households in New Prague. Based on positive survey responses, we estimate that by 2005, a minimum of five percent of the New Prague com- munity will be interested in home delivery (250 households). Our consumption or estimated volume esti- mate is also based on survey responses. We asked each potential customer how much milk they use each week and found that, on average, New Prague households use about 3.19 gallons of milk/week.

The use estimates for intermediaries are based on telephone conversations with dairy buyers and verbal agreements. Linden Hills cooperative, a medium-sized retailer, estimates that it will buy at least 45 gal- lons (90 half gallons) of milk from us each week.

Bottled Milk New Prague home delivery 5,000 x .05 = 250 3.19 gallons/week 797.5 gallons/week New Prague intermediaries Five 25 gallons/week 125 gallons/week Metro intermediaries 10 45 gallons/week 450 gallons/week 2005 4 TASK 111 BUILDING A SUSTAINABLE BUSINESS Figure 40.

Example from Cedar Summit Farm—Worksheet 4.2:  Potential Sales Volume 17Making Your Small Farm Profitable, Macher and Kerr Jr., 1999. 18Presentation at University of Minnesota Extension Service Workshop: “Planning for Profit, Land and Family,” 2002.