--- Set and Prioritize Goals ---

3 TASK 91 BUILDING A SUSTAINABLE BUSINESS like your business to be known for—a particular quality such as “old-fashioned” taste, environmental stewardship, competitive prices? If the mission will remain within the business, think about how it can be used to inspire and motivate future members of the business.

Draft a preliminary mission statement for your business. You will revisit this mission statement as you research, develop and evaluate business strategies for Planning Task Four. You can then make any necessary changes based on your research and strategic planning decisions. Limit your mission statement to five or six sentences and maintain a positive, active voice when writing. Think about these guidelines as you complete the statements in Worksheet 3.2: Creating My Business Mission Statement.

Set and Prioritize Goals With a vision and mission in mind, you and your planning team are ready to begin the process of goal setting—that critical first step towards the development of a working strategic plan with measurable objectives.

Goal setting is important for all businesses—but it is especially important for family farms because they involve family. Clearly defined goals not only motivate and inspire, but they can also help mitigate conflict for families and help direct limited resources toward value-driven priorities.

Many lenders and other private institutions expect to see clearly identified goals as a part of a business plan. Lisa Gulbranson, author of Organic Certification of Crop Production in Minnesota, notes that “some [organic] certification agencies require that producers map out long-term goals and strategies”7 as a part of their certification application. In this case, goal identification is not only a good idea, but is necessary.

What Are Goals?

Goals describe what you and your family would like to achieve—statements that point in the direction of your future vision for the business. They reflect the “what” and “who” pieces of your vision—what it is you would like to market, what the farm landscape will look like, who will be involved in operations, and what you intend to earn from the business. Goals do not describe the “how” components of your business—how you plan to market and price a product, purchase equipment, staff the operation, etc. You will draft and test these “how to” strategy ideas in Planning Task Four. 7 Organic Certification of Crop Production in Minnesota, Gulbranson, 2001 (revised).