--- Mary Doerr of Dancing Winds Farm linked up ---

fairs, radio, television, and the Internet are just a few promotional delivery options. Be sure to brainstorm with your planning team. Identify creative, low-cost, effective ways to get the word out. You might consider a word-of-mouth campaign or a strategic alliance with another farmer.

Mary Doerr of Dancing Winds Farm linked up with a nearby Community Supported Agriculture (CSA) business owner to offer “cheese shares” in its CSA brochure. The Minars negotiated a verbal agreement with a meat producer in West Central Minnesota to market Cedar Summit Farm milk products to that producer’s existing direct market customers. That agreement would allow the Minars to promote their milk products beyond South Central Minnesota and gradually increase the size of their target market.

Timing and frequency. Promotional strategies should include a plan for timed delivery or an advertising schedule that describes how often you will communicate with customers to follow- up on a sale, inform them of holiday specials (see Figure 56), or let them know about new products and prices. Regular communication is a way to build and preserve your market.

Frank Foltz of Northwind Nursery and Orchards maintains regular contact with customers by informing them about new orchard research and varieties.

How will you advertise and maintain contact with your customers? Through regular personal contact, periodic promotional mailings, or a holiday mailer?

It may be helpful to develop a calendar for promotional “events” to help time promotions with seasonal demand or peak production periods. This will also help you plan for advertising expense outlays when developing your cash flow plan as you evaluate your proposed strategy later in this Planning Task.

A series of interviews with Minnesota and Wisconsin retail buyers found that farmers who communicated regularly with buyers regarding deliveries and product availability were more successful at maintaining these customers.36 When communicating with intermediaries, it is a good idea to appoint a single representative to deal with the buyers so that a personal relationship can be built. This person should be knowledgeable about your business’ products and able to negotiate with buyers.

Figure 56.

Cedar Summit Farm holiday flyer/advertisement for cheese and meat boxes 4 TASK 130 BUILDING A SUSTAINABLE BUSINESS 36New Markets for Producers: Selling to Retail Stores, Center for Integrated Agricultural Systems, 1999.