--- Using This Guide ---

Using This Guide This Guide is intended to be user-friendly—written so that anyone should be able to walk through the business planning process by following the Planning Tasks.

As you begin the planning process, try to work through the tasks as they are ordered and to consider all four of the functional areas within each task, since these aspects of business management are interrelated. However, it is equally important to work through this Guide in a way that makes sense given your needs and time constraints. You may not be able to address all of your planning needs the first time through this Guide. It may be more important to simply begin the process of planning and to recognize that it will be an ongoing project.

Some of the Planning Tasks are quite involved, such as Task Four, in which you develop alternative business strategies. As you go through each consideration for each of the marketing and finance alternatives, it can be easy to forget where you are! We’ve provided a flow diagram that we’ll repeat at the beginning of each section, to help you keep track of where you are in the planning process and show you how it relates to the big planning picture.

The Table of Contents includes a list of completed Worksheet samples and the page number where they can be found in the text. This will allow you to find them more easily when you begin working on your own Worksheets. Blank Worksheets for you to use are found at the end of each Planning Task.

Each Planning Task also ends with a section about which parts of your work from that Planning Task should be included in a final business plan. You can also use the FINPACK Business Planning Software to help you assemble the final plan, and use the data directly from financial Worksheets.

Before You Begin: Why Develop a Business Plan and Who Should Be Involved in the Planning Process?

New and experienced business owners, regardless of history or current situation, can benefit from business planning. As an experienced producer, you may develop a business plan to: map out a transition from conventional to organic production management; expand your operation; incorporate more family members or partners into your business; transfer or sell the business; add value to your existing operation through product processing, direct sales 14 BUILDING A SUSTAINABLE BUSINESS