--- Pricing: How will we ---

were handled (cleaned, stored and transported) in accordance with organic standards.27 Use Worksheet 4.5:

Distribution and Packaging to develop and describe your overall distribution strategy or strategies.

The decisions you make here will affect your future workload and consequently, your human resources strategy.

Pricing: How will we price our product?

Farmers are all too familiar with the challenges of pricing bulk commodities for profit. As price takers, low market prices are often the number one reason traditional commodity producers find themselves sitting down to develop a business plan. Today’s producers, whether they are adding value or marketing a specialty commodity, have a greater ability to influence price in these highly defined markets. Depending on your goals, vision, target market, and product strategy, you may want to consider one or more pricing strategies for undifferentiated (traditional) commodities and differentiated (value-added, specialty) products.

In general, pricing strategies are based on two factors: prevailing market prices and your costs. In the long run, your price has to cover your full costs— Worksheet 4.5 Distribution and Packaging Complete this Worksheet for each major product you plan to produce. Describe how you intend to move and package this product for each target market segment. Note where and how the product will be shipped (location and scope) and what type of distribution channel you will utilize (movement). Next, based on each distribution plan, research and describe one or more packaging strategies for this product. Consider what type of packaging might be valued by customers (e.g., conven ience) or even required by intermediaries and distributors. Describe a delivery and handling schedule by period (month, season, year).Then, summarize your distribution and packaging strategies for this product.

Product:

Period:

Customer Segment:

Location:

Scope:

Movement (distribution channel):

Industry packaging requirements:

Packaging ideas:

Delivery schedule & handling:

CONTINUED Bottled milk Weekly 2—Retail customers Scott County and Twin Cities Metro Area Fairly extensive in Scott county and the Twin Cities Metro area Intermediaries We have spoken with dairy managers from each of the following retail stores - all have verbally agreed to stock our milk: County Market—Northfield, MN; County Market—Prior Lake, MN; Cub Foods—Shakopee, MN; Econo Foods—Northfield, MN; Hampton Park Co-op—St. Paul, MN; Lakewinds Natural Foods—Minnetonka, MN; Linden Hills Co-op—Minneapolis, MN; Lorentz Meats and Deli—Cannon Falls, MN; Mississippi Market— St. Paul, MN; North County Co-op—Minneapolis, MN; Rademacher Super Value—Jordan, MN; River Market— Stillwater, MN; Seward Co-op & Deli—Minneapolis, MN; Valley Natural Foods—Burnsville, MN; Wedge Community Food Co-op—Minneapolis, MN Need to research.

We will explore promotional packaging with a logo design for all products. Bottled milk may be packaged in recyclable or re-useable glass or plastic containers. The manager of the Hampton Park Co- op in St. Paul originally told us she didn’t have enough room for our products in her dairy case. When we told her the milk would be non-homogenized, creamline milk in glass bottles, she changed her mind. She posted her own survey on the dairy case, asking her customers if they wanted “Milk in Glass.” Twenty-four of the 26 respondents responded positively. This kind of reaction among retail customers and co-op man- agers has been very typical.

We plan to make weekly deliveries to retailers. A specific delivery schedule will be worked out with each manager when milk is available. 4 TASK 121 BUILDING A SUSTAINABLE BUSINESS Figure 46.

Example from Cedar Summit Farm—Worksheet 4.5:  Distribution and Packaging (side 2) ........ 27Organic Certification of Crop Production in Minnesota, Gulbranson, 2001 (revised).