--- Farm Financial Management using actual ---

4 TASK 171 BUILDING A SUSTAINABLE BUSINESS There are two types of financial planning tools available to analyze whole farm profitability: partial budgeting and long-range planning. Both the partial budgeting and long-range planning approaches allow you to compare the outlook of your present farm operation with that of one or more proposed strategic alternatives.

The first tool, partial budgeting, is most useful if your current business is financially sound and the change that you are considering is relatively simple.

For instance, Greg Reynolds’ plan to add a staff member and a walk-in cooler would be best analyzed using the partial budget approach since his strategy to relieve seasonal labor constraints does not involve a major change in business operations.

The second tool, long-range planning, is used to project whole farm profitability and cash flow when you are considering substantial reorganization of the business or operations. Long-range planning is different from partial budgeting in that you project the financial status of the business after the change is in place instead of just the financial impact of the change. This planning approach is recommended if your whole farm strategy involves a major change in operations (like the Minars’ addition of an on-farm processing plant and home delivery service) or if you are a beginning farmer with no business history. Long-range planning generally takes more effort than partial budgeting, but there are many advantages to using this tool. After completing a long- range planning analysis you gain a complete financial picture of the farm after implementation and determine if your alternative plans are likely to put your operation on a sound financial course.

Partial budgeting. The partial budget approach uses annual income and expense changes to simultaneously study the impact of a new business idea on your present business’ profitability and cash flow.

The real-life example in Figure 89 illustrates how partial budgeting can be used to evaluate the financial impact of hoop house and farrowing livestock purchases on a small-scale hog enterprise.66 In this example, the farmer currently purchases and finishes 620 pigs—this is considered her base plan.

Alternatively, she would like to farrow and finish 388 pigs in a hoop house (and continue purchasing and finishing out another 230 pigs). With the hoop house and livestock purchases, total costs or outflows for the whole farm increase by $13,026 per year. At the same time, the owner can expect an annual increase in cash inflows equal to $1,875 worth of culled breeding livestock.

The net result shows that the hog operation’s owner will generate $4,369 additional profits from the addition of hoop-house farrowing. The farm owner has captured the ownership cost of the hoop house and breeding livestock by 66Example prepared by the Center for Farm Financial Management using actual records from a Minnesota farm.