--- Farm Credit System (FCS): ---

charges, in effect, reflect the funds that need to be set aside in order to replace the depreciating asset.

Direct marketing: marketing directly to customers without involving retailers, wholesalers, agents or other intermediaries; the easiest, fastest and least expensive contact with your business’ target market.

Distribution: moving a product or service from producer to customer; taking orders, packing, inventory management, storage, transportation and follow-up service.

Earned net worth change: represents income that either contributed to or depleted the farm’s net worth. The earned net worth change is calculated by adding nonfarm income to net farm income and then subtracting family living expenses, partner withdrawals, and taxes.

Equity: represents ownership or percentage of ownership in a business or items of value.

Expenses: daily costs incurred in running and maintaining a business.

Export broker: an entity that brings together foreign buyers with domestic manufacturers for a fee, generally providing few other services.

Export license: a government-issued legal permit to export merchandise.

Farm: As of 1997, the USDA defines a farm as any place from which $1,000 or more of agricultural products were produced and sold, or normally would have been sold during the year.

Farm Credit System (FCS): a system made up of cooperatively owned financial institutions in districts covering the United States and Puerto Rico that finance farm and farm-related mortgages and operating loans.

Institutions within each district specialize in farmland loans and operating credit or lending to farmer-owned supply, marketing, and processing cooperatives. FCS institutions rely on the bond market as a source of funds.

Family farm: an agricultural business that (1) produces agricultural commodities for sale in such quantities so as to be recognized as a farm rather than a rural residence; (2) produces enough income (including off farm employment) to pay family and farm operating expenses, to pay debts, and to maintain the property; (3) is managed by the operator; (4) has a substantial amount of labor provided by the operator and family; and (5) may use seasonal labor during peak periods and a reasonable amount of full-time hired labor.

Financial feasibility: the ability of a business plan or investment to satisfy the financing terms and performance criteria agreed to by a borrower and a lender.

Common stock: the most frequently issued class of stock; usually it provides a voting right but is secondary to preferred stock in dividend and liquidation rights.

Competition: the contest between businesses for customers and sales.

Community Supported Agriculture (CSA): CSA organizations are similar to a cooperative in that you produce for members. CSA members purchase annual shares of production at the beginning of the year or season. In return, they receive weekly or bi-monthly deliveries of fruits, vegetables and/or livestock products.

Consumer good: products that are produced and sold to the final consumer.

Cooperative: an organization formed for the purpose of producing and marketing goods or products owned collectively by members who share in the benefits.

Corporation: a separate legal entity that is owned by one or more shareholders.

Crop rotation: the practice of alternating the species or families of annual or biennial crops grown on specific fields in a planned pattern or sequence so as to break weed, pest and disease cycles, and improve soil fertility and organic matter content.

Current assets: the cash and other assets that will be received, converted to cash, or consumed in production during the next 12 months. This generally includes cash and checking balances, crops held for sale or feed, livestock held for sale, prepaid expenses and supplies, the value of growing crops, accounts receivable, hedging account balances, and any other assets that can quickly be turned into cash.

Current liabilities: debts due and payable within one year from the date of the balance sheet. In addition to short term operating loans, this usually includes accounts payable, accrued interest and other accrued expenses, and government crop loans. By definition, the amount of principal due within 12 months on intermediate and long- term debts is also considered a current liability.

Custom work: specific farm operations performed under contract between a farmer and contractor. The contractor furnishes labor, equipment, and materials to perform the operation. Custom harvesting of grain, spraying and picking of fruit, and sheep shearing are examples of custom work.

Demographics: customer groups based on age, sex, race, religion, education, marital status, income and household size.

Depreciation: prorating the cost of a depreciable asset over its projected economic life to account for any decline in the asset’s production value over time. Depreciation Glossary 258 BUILDING A SUSTAINABLE BUSINESS