--- Develop a Contingency Plan ---

Develop a Contingency Plan and Exit Strategy You have confidently chosen a final whole farm strategy based on your thorough research and evaluation. Now, one of your last steps in the planning process is to develop a contingency plan—an action plan for how to respond should conditions within and outside the business change. They will. Contingency planning is important to assure that your business plan will be implemented smoothly.

Throughout the planning process you’ve used your research to inform and make a number of realistic assumptions about the industry, prices, productivity and labor. Assumptions, however, are just that—best guesses that can change. No matter how carefully you plan, the likelihood of everything working out precisely as planned is small.71 A contingency plan can help you prepare for those situations when things don’t go as planned—when market or economic conditions that are out of your control change. A contingency plan can also help you know when it’s time to exit the business if it is not successful Consider how the following problems, for example, could change your cash flow during the transition period: • New construction costs 20 percent more than planned. • Funds are borrowed but income flows are delayed for six months. • Construction is stopped because of a missing regulatory permit. • Livestock productivity is stunted due to dry pasture conditions. • The person you hire to manage operations is incompetent or untrustworthy. • You do not obtain a sales contract for your first year’s production. • Market prices sink to 15 percent below average historical values.

A sound business plan will lay out what needs to be done to avoid or address these delays, inefficiencies, and bottlenecks in the form of a contingency or control plan.

Contingency plans need not be long or complicated. If you intend to share your written business plan with lenders or other external business partners, contingency plans simply need to convince readers that you’ve done a thorough job of planning and that the business is prepared to respond successfully should internal and external conditions change. If your business plan is strictly for family or internal planning purposes, a contingency plan can be used as something to 4 TASK 182 BUILDING A SUSTAINABLE BUSINESS 71Planning for Contingencies, in Business Owners’ Toolkit online, CCH Incorporated, 2002.