--- Dave and Florence Minar of Cedar Summit Farm surveyed their local community ---

buying behavior or benefits sought. Use Worksheet 4.1: Customer Segmentation to help you develop and research customer profiles.

Sales potential. If you plan to produce and market a traditional bulk commodity, you won’t have much trouble calculating sales potential. The market for undifferentiated commodities is fluid and can typically absorb all that you produce (albeit at a lower price sometimes).

Estimating sales potential becomes more challenging and important when tapping into a specialty commodity market (such as lentils) that may have limited demand, or when your target market is highly sought after and made up of individual households.

As a specialty commodity producer, your customer (usually another business) will make known how much they are willing to buy short- term (one to two years) either through a written contract or verbal agreement. Projecting long-term sales potential may prove more difficult as these markets are usually immature and untested.

Similarly, your task of projecting sales potential can be tricky when marketing to individual households. You will need to conduct careful research and be honest with yourself about the market’s growth potential. As mentioned earlier, Dave and Florence Minar of Cedar Summit Farm surveyed their local community about milk usage and demand for home delivery services. From this research, they were able to project sales of up to 798 gallons of home delivered bottle milk per week.

Alternatively, if the Minars did not have the luxury of time or funds to survey their target market, they might develop conservative sales estimates Worksheet 4.1 Complete this Worksheet for each major product you plan to produce. Develop a profile of the customer(s) you intend to target by market segment. Note the geographic, demographic, and psychographic characteristics of each segment. Be sure to describe your customers’ needs and preferences and what they value. Use additional sheets of paper if this product has more than three major market segments.

Customer Segmentation Product:

Customer Segment: 1 2 3 Geographic Demographic Psychographic Needs/Preferences Bottled Milk Home delivery customers New Prague community Elderly and families with young children Health conscious “Old fashioned,” safe, healthy products Retail customers Twin Cities Metro and New Prague communities Upper, middle class Health conscious Healthy, high-quality, local products 4 TASK 110 BUILDING A SUSTAINABLE BUSINESS Figure 39.

Example from Cedar Summit Farm— Worksheet 4.1:  Customer Segmentation .......