--- to Maryland, Virginia and ---

Production system.

Before making their decision to process, the Minars traveled thousands of miles to Maryland, Virginia and West Virginia to visit four other farmer-owned milk processing plants. Each of the plants was similar in size to the Minars’ proposed operation. They processed with “Mini- Dairy” equipment from an Israeli-based company called Pladot. By visiting the plants, observing production, and talking first-hand with plant owners, Dave and Florence feel they gained invaluable insights that helped them with decisions about plant construction, equipment purchases and marketing.

Your choice of production system will be heavily influenced by your social, environmental and community values. This might be a good time to revisit your values and goals, and to recall your objectives for the whole farm. Each production system carries with it different resource requirements, production outcomes, labor demands and natural resource implications.

As you define one or more production system strategies, try to be specific about how the system will work on your farm. If your vision includes a major change in production, think about the resource requirements and the trade- offs between labor, productivity, conservation and profitability that may be associated with different production management systems. Use the space in Worksheet 4.10: Production System and Schedule to describe your production system strategies for each farm enterprise. If you plan to produce crops or livestock, for instance, detail your plans for:

Worksheet 4.10 Use the space below to describe the production management system(s) that you use for each enterprise.You may have more than one enterprise for each product that you plan to produce. Be sure to detail your management plans for all enterprises. If you plan to gradually transition into a new management system, complete this Worksheet for each year or season during the transition period.You might find it helpful to use a map or calendar to describe any seasonal or transi- tion-related management plans.

Production System and Schedule Enterprise Year System Schedule/Rotation At Cedar Summit Farm we will continue to graze our dairy herd and use all milk from the herd for on-farm processing by 2005. Milk will be hauled to the Creamery with a bulk tank trailer and pumped into a raw milk storage tank. The milk will then move to a pasteurizer and be pasteurized. Next it will be separated into skim milk and cream, and then some cream will be added back to make the assorted milk products.

The rest of the cream will be made into ice cream, butter, and other products.

Each batch of milk brought from the dairy barn to the plant will be tested at an on-site lab for traces of antibiotics and butterfat content. Once milk is pasteurized, each batch will be further tested for proper pas- teurization. The Minnesota Department of Agriculture will periodically test the milk for bacteria. Finally, all bottled milk and products (except ice cream) will be moved to a 39-degree cooler for storage. 4 TASK 135 BUILDING A SUSTAINABLE BUSINESS Figure 59.

Excerpt from Cedar Summit Farm’s Worksheet 4.10:  Production System and Schedule • Weed, pest and disease control • Soil fertility • Rotation • Tillage • Irrigation • Water quality • Seed selection • Breed selection • Fencing • Feed • Housing • Stocking • Waste and quality control .......