--- teams, the Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock, the Ministry of the Environment and Water, universities, NGOs ---

72

providing technical assistance (by the project team and partner institutions) to facilitate the implementation
of the acquired knowledge on climate-smart livestock management;

promoting the conservation of the genetic diversity of cocoa (in situ) in local gardens;

monitoring GHG emissions and climate risk to evaluate the impact of field interventions; and

promoting the sustainability of the climate-smart livestock approach through strategic alliances for the
implementation of interventions.
Contributing to the SDGs and scaling up CSA
FAO’s work on climate-smart livestock management and cocoa production contributes to SDG 5 (Gender equality),
SDG 2 (Zero hunger), SDG 13 (Climate action) and SDG 15 (Life on land). Under the climate-smart livestock
project, participatory rural approaches focusing on gender issues were developed to assure the participation of
women and equal leadership opportunities. In addition, focus groups analysed gender relationships in livestock
production systems; the results were used to adjust the capacity development process to the requirements of men
and women. The climate-smart cocoa project aims to empower women in decision-making processes; it highlights
their role in cocoa producers’ associations and as chakramamas in the chakra system. A chakramama is a mother
of a family or wise woman who is responsible for the chakra and develops and transmits knowledge and practices
to other women.
The projects include elements that can be relevant to the scaling up of CSA. For example, the development of tools
to quantify GHG emissions and determine climate risk at farm level were among the activities of the climate-smart
livestock project. These technological innovations have not only been crucial for the monitoring and analysis of the
effectiveness of the approach; they also provide a first step towards sustainability and replicability of the project’s
activities at the national level.
The climate-smart livestock and cocoa projects contribute to the three pillars of CSA:
Sustainably increase agricultural productivity and incomes
The climate-smart livestock project organized 859 training events in 37 FFSs to implement the project in the field
and develop producers’ capacities. This field implementation was a joint effort by the provincial technical project
teams, the Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock, the Ministry of the Environment and Water, universities, NGOs
and local governments. As a result, climate-smart livestock management practices are now being implemented by
1 056 cattle farmers, on a total area of 40 388 ha; 1 046 beef and dairy cattle farmers (33 percent of them women)
are permanently linked with the project. Between 2017 and 2020, the incomes of these farmers increased by
16.76 percent, their productivity by 12.85 percent and environmental production efficiency (more productivity with
less emissions) by 27.18 percent.
In 2019, BanEcuador earmarked USD 13.6 million for microcredits with a preferential interest rate (9.76 percent).
This pilot ended in May 2020. Over the course of the trial period, 66 credits were granted for a total value of
USD 934 871. Together, these credits have the potential to reduce emissions by 1 011 015.57 kg CO2eq/year.
The project established seven community funds that allowed cattle producers to acquire small loans to implement
climate-smart livestock practices. To date, credit allocation by the community funds sums up to USD 25 000.
The project also promoted the development of six centres for agricultural services. These centres mobilized
USD 37 900 to support local startups and promote the implementation of good livestock practices.
The climate-smart cocoa project aims to help small and medium-sized producers access markets by providing them
with negotiation tools and market analysis. To achieve this aim, the project carried out a study on access to cocoa
niche markets, and helped farmers identify additional sources of income.