--- Climate-Smart Agriculture Investment Plan ---

8 Mali – complementing agricultural policies through the Climate-Smart Agriculture Investment Plan Introduction The 2019 Climate-Smart Agriculture Investment Plan (CSAIP) for Mali is the result of a consultation process led by the country’s Ministry of Agriculture in which multiple stakeholders – including inter alia other governmental institutions, civil society actors and research institutions – were strongly involved. The consultation effort was supported by the World Bank under the Adaptation of African Agriculture initiative, under a multi-country effort coordinated by the World Bank as part of its IDA18 commitments (International Development Association, 2017). The CSAIP is based on scientific evidence; it was developed with technical assistance from the Alliance of Bioversity International and the International Center for Tropical Agriculture (CIAT), World Agroforestry and the Research Program on Climate Change, Agriculture and Food Security (CCAFS) of the Consortium of International Agricultural Research Centres (CGIAR).

Mali’s CSAIP is based on the country’s agriculture and climate change policies, strategies and plans, including its nationally determined contribution (NDC) and national agricultural investment plan (NAIP). It contributes to the evidence base for CSA in numerous ways, for example by identifying financial and institutional needs. The plan proposes 12 science-based CSA priority areas for investment, with project concepts that are packaged and ready for investors. The CSAIP foregrounds climate concerns and prioritizes CSA interventions that offer feasible and robust solutions. It also provides a monitoring and evaluation (M&E) framework that is aligned with other national programming processes. Mali’s CSAIP helps understand how climate change is likely to impact upon agricultural production and trade and food security in Mali, highlighting how it is expected to have disproportionate negative effects on the rural poor. The CSAIP investments offer actionable solutions to reduce risk, build resilience and adapt to the identified climate impacts, as well as reduce GHG emissions. Mali’s CSAIP also highlights the beneficial impacts the investments can have on the economy and the environment.

Rationale The CSAIP provides an overview of Mali’s agriculture sector and its climate change context. Over one third of Mali’s total land area is used for agriculture. Farmers mostly grow subsistence crops on small holdings; over 85 percent of agricultural households also rear livestock. Overall agricultural productivity is low and there are significant yield gaps for most crops. Meanwhile, population growth is high and the pressure on land resources is increasing, resulting in land degradation. Droughts, floods and other adverse climatic events affect over 72 percent of Mali’s population, ©FAO/Fulvio Cenci