--- Know Your Markets, Protect ---

Page 3 ATTRA www.attra.ncat.org it will take. And for a more detailed look at some of these same fundamentals, see the ATTRA publication Applying the Principles of Sustainable Agriculture.

Know Your Markets, Protect Your Proﬁts, and Add Value to Your Products Diversify enterprises.

Market outside the commodity supply chains and corporate vertical integra tors.

Emphasize direct marketing and pre mium specialty markets.

Consider forming a cooperative with other farmers.

Add value through on-farm processing.

Holistic Management Evaluating a Rural Enterprise Moving Beyond Conventional Cash Cropping Entertainment Farming and Agri-Tourism Agricultural Business Planning Templates Enterprise Budgets and Production Costs for Organic Production Preparing for an Organic Inspection:

Steps and Checklists Direct Marketing Farmers’ Markets CSA (Community Supported Agriculture) Bringing Local Food to Local Institutions Selling to Restaurants Organic Certiﬁcation and the National Organic Program Organic Marketing Resources Alternative Meat Marketing • • • • • 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 USDA-RBS Series on Cooperatives Keys to Success in Value-added Agriculture Adding Value to Farm Products: An Overview Grain Processing Oilseed Processing for Small Producers Food Dehydration Options Soyfoods: Adding Value to Soybeans Sorghum Syrup Value-added Dairy Options Build Soil Structure and Fertility Reduce the use of synthetic fertilizers by increasing on-farm nutrient cycling.

Make fertilization decisions based on soil tests.

Minimize or eliminate tillage.

Think of the soil not only as a physical and chemical substrate but as a living entity; manage the soil organisms to pre serve their healthy diversity.

Maintain ground cover year-round by using cover crops and mulches and by leaving crop residues in the ﬁeld.

Sustainable Soil Management Drought Resistant Soil Nutrient Cycling in Pastures Manures for Organic Crop Production 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 • • • • • 4 4 4 4 No-till soybeans growing through wheat stubble in Kansas. Photo courtesy USDA NRCS.

Fresh peaches at a farmers market in Cali fornia. Photo by Erik Dungan.