--- provided by the Swiss Federal Office for Agriculture under its Quality and Sustainability in Agriculture ---

55
Multi-stakeholder approaches can effectively contribute to reducing GHG emissions and improving farmers’
livelihoods by engaging relevant actors and building on their expertise. The climate-smart dairy farming
initiative was therefore developed as a public-private partnership. The funds for research and training were
provided by the Swiss Federal Office for Agriculture under its Quality and Sustainability in Agriculture
programme, which financially supports innovative agricultural projects for sustainability and quality in the
country. Adopting climate-smart practices can in the short run cause a reduction in farmers’ incomes as they
may have to change their structure, way of working, or invest in new technologies. This is the case, for example,
for investments in on-farm biogas plants, which only generate financial benefits in the long term. Even where
GHG reduction practices have a positive financial impact for farmers in the short run, they still need a financial
motivation to start. Without financial compensation, it is difficult to motivate farmers to spend time to learn
and implement new practices before the financial benefits become visible. Once farmers experience the
financial benefits of new practices first-hand, these practices can be sustainably implemented in the long run
without large payments.
To incentivize farmers to implement climate-smart practices, Nestlé funded goal-oriented premium payments
and participation payments under this project. Switzerland is Nestlé’s pilot country for GHG reduction in dairy
production. Aaremilch receives milk from the 46 pilot farms included in the project. The Bern University of Applied
Sciences contributes to the project through scientific support.
Description
Farmers can individually choose from a set of available measures and implement those measures that best suit their
situation. The GHG reduction measures covered by the project are:

increasing the number of lactations per cow, thus reducing the share of non-productive animals in the herd;

increasing lifetime performance (kilogram of milk per life day);

feeding manure and slurry into biogas fermenters; and

increasing coupled dairy-beef production by using double-use breeds and sperm sexing, so that animals can
be used for milk and meat production.
Two further measures are under research, namely:

increasing feed efficiency; and

using methane-inhibiting feed additives, such as linseed.
Farmers are financially incentivized to implement GHG reduction measures to assure scalability with limited
funding. Given the difficult economic situation of many Swiss dairy farmers, financial incentives are crucial to
upscale the project and assure its long-term sustainability. Therefore, an innovative payment system was elaborated
together with the farmers to motivate farmers to participate and create an impact.
The goal-oriented payments are coupled to effectively achieved GHG reductions and paid directly to dairy
farmers by Nestlé, based on the kilograms of milk produced using climate-smart livestock practices. These
premium payments motivate farmers to implement climate-smart measures. Farmers’ GHG reduction goals are
set individually, based on their baseline GHG emissions per kilogram of milk. Farmers who already have low
GHG emissions per kilogram of milk need to reduce their emissions by less than farmers with a higher GHG
emissions baseline. The goal-oriented premium payments, which are paid per kilogram of milk delivered, favour
larger farmers. The project therefore also pays a participation bonus to farmers who attend different trainings
sessions and deliver certain farm data; this favours smaller farmers. The participation bonus is the same for all
farmers, if they participate in all training sessions.
Outcomes
The 46 pilot farms, which together deliver 7.5 million kg of milk per year to Aaremilch, managed to reduce their
GHG emissions significantly. In 2019, 22 million kg of milk were produced using climate-smart livestock practices