--- Farmer Field Schools (FFS) are implemented by FAO in Africa, Latin America and Asia. ---

14 Senegal – enhancing CSA learning by understanding indigenous knowledge and perceptions of climate change Introduction Farmer Field Schools (FFS) are implemented by FAO in Africa, Latin America and Asia.6 The FFS approach is a community-based learning-by-doing approach whereby local agricultural practices are compared to practices suggested by science and research. It enhances the understanding of complex agro-ecosystems. Communities are encouraged to change their agricultural practices and thus improve their production systems and define their future.

The FFS methodology regards sustainable agriculture as anchored in ecology and farmer empowerment. FFS are based on the observation, analysis and understanding of local agro-ecosystems. In FFS, “the field is the book”; all activities are discovery-based and aim at finding solutions to local needs based on a thorough understanding of biological synergies and ecosystem functions.

In Senegal, FAO identified a need to better integrate indigenous knowledge and perceptions of climate change into the learning process. Under a GEF project entitled Mainstreaming Ecosystem-Based Approaches to Climate-Resilient Rural Livelihoods in Vulnerable Rural Areas through the Farmer Field School Methodology, which started in November 2015 and will last until the end of 2021, data are collected from local producers.7 This investigation contributes to the evidence base for CSA implementation by providing key information that can be used to reduce communities’ vulnerability and increase their adaptation capacity, as well as introduce new elements on climate change adaptation into FFS curricula.

Rationale Climate change is worsening the already vulnerable conditions of smallholder farmers in Senegal, who depend primarily on crop and livestock production and natural resource management. Although smallholder farmers are those that are the most vulnerable to the effects of climate change, they are also the main agents of solutions and holders of climate knowledge, who have always mobilized their knowledge and capacities for complex human- environment interaction to deal with climate change.

Smallholder farmers actively engage with their natural environment in their daily lives and are experienced and attentive observers. As such, they have accumulated important and sophisticated knowledge and practices related to the environment, its variability and transformation. Local communities have faced environmental variability and unpredictability for centuries. They have developed a wide variety of technical, social and economic responses that form the basis of their resilience to change. 6 For more information on Farmer Field Schools, please visit the Global Farmer Field School Platform at www.fao.org/farmer-field-schools/overview. 7 For more information on the project, see www.fao.org/3/CA0842FR/ca0842fr.pdf. ©FAO/Stefano Mondovì