--- Page 30 ---

20 Africa and the Near East – using remote sensing to monitor water productivity Introduction FAO employs satellite remote sensing technology for a wide range of tasks, including the monitoring of droughts and other climate hazards and their impact on agriculture and farmers worldwide. FAO hosts WaPOR (Water Productivity Open-Access Portal), a publicly accessible portal to monitor water productivity based on remotely sensed derived data.10 The information collected through WaPOR is freely available and based on open source technologies. The database helps countries monitor water productivity in agriculture, identify water productivity gaps, formulate solutions to reduce these gaps and sustainably increase agricultural production.

By monitoring key variables on water and agriculture in near-real time, WaPOR directly contributes to the first action point of CSA (evidence base). WaPOR provides open access to high temporal and spatial resolution data on reference and actual evapotranspiration, biomass development and more from 2009 to date. The database currently contains data for the whole of Africa and the Near East, and is intended to grow into a global database. Reference evapotranspiration is a key parameter to capture the climatic conditions that influence water requirements in agriculture. Together with data on actual evapotranspiration (real water consumption), reference evapotranspiration data are crucial to improve the efficiency of the use of inputs. Thus, the WaPOR database is highly relevant to the sustainable production and adaptation pillars of CSA. In addition, WaPOR can provide information regarding progress under CSA’s third pillar as it contains data on carbon uptake by vegetation through biomass development.

The WaPOR project, which is implemented by FAO with funding from the Netherlands, started in November 2016 and ran until 31 January 2021; its second phase is expected to run until December 2025.

Rationale Guaranteeing food security for all while using water resources in a sustainable manner is one of the major challenges faced by society in the 21st century. The difficulty of this challenge is exacerbated by the climate crisis and other global changes. Agriculture is responsible for about 70  percent of global freshwater withdrawals for economic activities; it is even responsible for about 90 percent of global net freshwater consumption (i.e. withdrawals net of return flows) for economic purposes (FAO, 2020a). It is therefore of key importance to develop a system to monitor water productivity in agriculture and identify ways to improve this productivity.11 Remote sensing technologies offer unprecedented opportunities to monitor water productivity in large areas and in near-real time, which is a suitable temporal resolution for action-oriented information in agriculture. 10 For more information on WaPOR, visit FAO’s website at www.fao.org/land-water/databases-and-software/wapor. 11 Water productivity is defined as the ratio between agricultural output (typically yield, but also economic return or other types of output) and the water consumed to obtain this output. In the context of WaPOR, and in assessments of water productivity in agriculture in general, it is expressed as kg/m³. ©FAO/Thomas Hug