--- Page 17 ---

7
Introduction to expanding the evidence base
Action point 1 of implementing climate-smart agriculture is expanding the evidence base. This
introduction to action point 1 draws on FAO’s CSA sourcebook (FAO, 2021a).2
Building the evidence base for CSA entails:

stocktaking of current site-specific climate challenges and vulnerabilities, options for
intervention and institutional capacities;

collecting and analysing information to prioritize CSA options, while clearly identifying
existing uncertainties;

monitoring and evaluating implemented policies and practices, and sharing findings and
lessons learned.
Expanding the evidence base contributes towards a better understanding of the challenges posed by
climate change to the building of sustainable agri-food systems and improved rural livelihoods. It
helps prioritize opportunities to work towards the SDGs and provides a foundation for monitoring
and evaluating implemented policies and practices.
Policymaking and implementation choices that are based on evidence help exploit opportunities to
the fullest and limit risks. For certain areas of CSA, a valuable evidence base is now available − as
demonstrated by the case studies in this chapter. For other areas, additional or updated evidence
is needed to build enabling policy frameworks, strengthen national and local institutions, enhance
funding and financing options and implement effective practices at the field level.
Ideally, efforts to expand the evidence base for CSA implementation are guided by an understanding
of site-specific challenges, opportunities and barriers; they should embrace collaboration with
partners and stakeholders and promote the sharing and combining of various types of knowledge.
In addition, efforts to build evidence should identify the synergies and trade-offs between various
CSA policies and practices, and compare their impact to the baseline situation and to the impact of
alternative interventions. Efforts to expand the evidence base on CSA greatly benefit from a good
understanding of the institutional and financial requirements for CSA implementation.
The five case studies highlighted in this chapter demonstrate that building the evidence base underpins
all other action points of CSA, as it provides information that can be used under these action points
and thus increases the likelihood that they will be successful. Vice versa, the other action points
help build a strong evidence base for CSA implementation by providing lessons learned on policy
frameworks, national and local institutions, financing options and field-level practices. This two-
way knowledge flow should enable the scaling up of sustainable agricultural practices that enable
farmers to sustainably increase their incomes, adapt to the effects of climate change and reduce and/
or remove GHG emissions.
2 For more information, see www.fao.org/climate-smart-agriculture-sourcebook/enabling-frameworks/module-c10-evidence-based-
implementation/chapter-c10-2.