--- and Central Asia (NEN) Divisions of IFAD. ---

30 IRECRP contributes to the first pillar of CSA i.e. sustainably increasing productivity. Annual impact assessments for IRECRP highlight that the farmers involved in IRECRP reported productivity gains over the years. In 2017/18, 71 percent of the beneficiaries of infrastructure schemes, the majority of whom are young micro-entrepreneurs, reported an increase in overall production. The 2019 annual report on the programme indicates that of the 321 beneficiaries of CA training, 44 percent reported increases in their yields per hectare of up to 10 percent, while 12 percent of beneficiaries reported an increase of 10 to 25 percent. Interviews with beneficiaries confirmed that the adoption of CA technologies had a positive impact on soil humidity levels, which helps farmers maintain acceptable yields during the increasingly frequent droughts. Furthermore, enterprises that had introduced mini-till and strip-till techniques reported increases in yields ranging from 10 to 25 percent following the introduction of CA techniques, depending on the type of crop.

CSA’s second pillar is embedded in IRECRP’s overall goal, which is to enable poor rural people to raise their incomes and strengthen their resilience. The programme promotes innovation as an answer to climate change, with a dedicated component aimed at promoting the adoption of CSA practices to enhance the adaptive capacity of especially small- scale farmers in locations that are increasingly susceptible to climate shocks. A grant of USD 4.26 million provided by GEF funds more than 65 percent of the programme’s component on climate change resilience and inclusive value chain development. The programme has already reached 175 percent of its target beneficiaries and achieved a good geographical spread of interventions across Moldova. As a consequence of the programme’s activities, the area under CA in the country is beginning to increase, as farmers are gradually accepting CA techniques as a viable option to deal with climate uncertainty and change. Overall, survey data show that the adoption of CA technologies has led to improvements in comparison with baseline data in terms of both yields and profitability. Farmers who have invested in shelterbelt protection and in the rehabilitation of grasslands, for example, report a positive impact on their productivity.

CSA’s third pillar is the reduction of GHG emissions. The promotion of CA in Moldova has directly led to a reduction in the use of fossil fuels and an increase in soil carbon sequestration. Even though there are no instruments under the IRECRP to monitor the effective reduction in GHG emissions resulting from the implementation of the programme in the field, it is clear that the CA activities promoted by the programme have an important mitigation effect.

This case study was submitted by the Environment, Climate, Gender and Social Inclusion (ECG) and the Near East, North Africa, Europe and Central Asia (NEN) Divisions of IFAD. ecgmailbox@ifad.org.