--- OECD Producer Support Estimate indicator) currently ---

Box 2: Summary of latest trends in the environmental performance of agriculture ● Driving forces: – Inputs. In OECD countries over the past 10 years, fertil- izer (-2 per cent) and pesticide use has declined (-8 per cent). However, water use has increased (three per cent), as has on-farm energy use (six per cent). With farm production increasing more rapidly than the use of most inputs, it appears that input efficiency has improved and, as a consequence, pressure on the environment in some cases may have been eased. – Policies. Support to OECD farmers (as measured by the OECD Producer Support Estimate indicator) currently accounts for about 30 per cent of total farm receipts, most of which is still linked to production.Production- linked support encourages the higher use of inputs.

Maintenance of land in agriculture often increases pressure on the environment than would otherwise be the case in the absence of this form of support.But there has been a shift away from “production-linked” policies and greater use of measures intended to improve the environment. National and international environmental policies are also exerting a growing influence on the environmental impact of farming, especially concerning water quality and availability, ammonia emissions, climate change, and biodiversity. – Agriculture’s role in the economy. From 1990 to 2003,the volume of agricultural production rose by three per cent, and further growth is projected over the next decade.With decreasing agricultural land area (-3 per cent) and employment (-10 per cent), higher produc- tivity is being achieved by genetic improvements,bet- ter input management (nutrients, pesticides, water and energy), technological innovations and changes in farm structures. ● State of the environment: – Nutrient surplus (the balance between nitrogen and phosphorus inputs, largely fertilizers and livestock Sustainable Agriculture – From Common Principles to Common Practice 198