--- Page 72 ---

The farm sustainability assessment procedure The research chain used in the delineation,classification and description of agricultural sustainability at the farm recommendation level followed these guidelines: 1. delineating the area (farm, region or country) into distinct units (farm units, AEZ or parcels); 2. selecting the delineated units with similar land attributes (biophys- ical and socio-economic); 3. defining the goal or requirements for the sustainability assessment such as: agricultural extension impact assessment, farm perform- ance assessment, farm sustainability assessment, land degradation and environmental vulnerability assessment (EVA) or land suitability assessment; 4. selecting the indicators to use in the key indicator suites for the delineated units.Some indicators can be used as integrators and for assessment framework validation; 5. specifying the critical limits of the selected indicators; 6. transforming the indicators into indices based on data about land attributes; 7. applying the indices to the agricultural sustainability assessment framework; and 8. identifying the limitations to farm-level agricultural sustainability and associating them with the agricultural extension objective,then suggesting sustainable land-use solutions including extension interventions.

Research chains in combination with geostatistical methods have previ- ously been applied in obtaining soil and land quality indicators (Hoosbeek and Bouma, 1998). The methodology of farm sustainability assessment and soil erosion risk estimation of CORINE (EU, 1992; Kosmas et al., 1999) was adopted, with several modifications to suit the area and its data endowment, for the composition of the indices. The approach systematically translates land resources attributes into indices and classes.

Several attributes are grouped into seven major indicator suites com- posed of related land and environmental characteristics.Table 1 gives an example of the land cover quality indicator suite. A similar classification Sustainable Agriculture – From Common Principles to Common Practice 59