--- Agricultural Impacts on Soil Erosion and Soil Biodiversity: ---

● Agricultural Impacts on Soil Erosion and Soil Biodiversity:

Developing Indicators for Policy Analysis. Italian Ministry of Agricultural and Forestry Policies, the Ministry for the Environment and Territory, and the National Institute of Agricultural Economics, Rome, Italy, March, 2003. ● Agriculture and Land Conservation: Developing Indicators for Policy Analysis. Japanese Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries, Kyoto, Japan, May, 2003. ● Agricultural Impacts on Water Use and Water Quality:

Developing Indicators for Policy Analysis. Korean Republic Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry and Korean Rural Development Administration, Gyeongju, the Republic of Korea, October, 2003. ● Farm Management and the Environment: Developing Indicators for Policy Analysis. New Zealand Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry, Palmerston, North, New Zealand, March, 2004.

Source: The Proceedings of these Expert Meetings can be freely downloaded from the OECD Web site at: www.oecd.org/agr/env/indicators.htm.

Recent progress in developing agri-environmental indicators OECD work on AEIs has led to considerable progress in both the identifi- cation and specification of the characteristics of policy-relevant indicators.

It has also calculated indicators in a number of areas, which now have gained an international reputation as providing a benchmark in environ- mental monitoring for the agricultural sector. In particular, progress has been made in developing AEIs against general OECD criteria of: ● policy relevance – addressing the main environmental issues faced by most or a representative group of OECD countries in the agriculture sector, while recognizing that some issues are policy relevant for some countries; ● analytical soundness – consistent with the best available scien- tific knowledge, while recognizing that this is constantly evolv- ing; Sustainable Agriculture – From Common Principles to Common Practice 195