--- Page 105 ---

Economic viability characterizes the economic efficiency of the farming systems in the short- and medium-term.This is an essential piece of data which must be relativized in light of the following indicators. Economic and financial independence generally guarantee the medium-term future of the farms by making it possible for production systems to adapt more easily to the inevitable changes in public aid,and to have the capacity to adapt the farm through new investments.

Transferability is a factor in analysis of the long-term. Indeed, the sustain- ability of agricultural systems is also based on their ability to carry on from one generation to the next. In case of succession, the amount of capital required to run and take over can end up leading to the farm being broken up.

The efficiency of the production process is used to evaluate the economic efficiency of the inputs used.This item assesses autonomy, that is to say the capacity of the production systems to make optimum use of their own resources, and guarantees their sustainability over the very long term.

One last stage: Analyze the results of surveys, apprehend the limits, validate the indicators This last stage is presented in the two next parts 3 and 4 of this paper. 3. Presentation of results of different case studies The following results come from studies over the period 1998–2002 involving tests on French farms representing different cropping systems.

One of the most important results to be underlined is that the sensitivity of the IDEA method is such that it is capable of observing differences in sustainability between production systems as well as within the same production system. We will begin by presenting case studies highlight- ing the intra-system sensitivity of the method (in the arable crops system in this case) then other studies will be presented to show differences in sustainability observed between several types of production.

Sustainable Agriculture – From Common Principles to Common Practice 92