--- Swiss College of Agriculture (SHL) ---

The Swiss College of Agriculture (SHL) is the Swiss centre for agricul- ture, forestry and dairy technology within the Universities of Applied Sciences. Besides education it is active in applied research and develop- ment as well as providing services in Switzerland and abroad. The research focuses on holistic approaches to optimize agricultural produc- tion, to minimize negative ecological impacts of agriculture and to fur- nish practical recommendations for sustainable farming systems. SHL specializes in “on-farm research”and carries out interdisciplinary projects in which solutions of high practical relevance are developed in collabo- ration with the stakeholders. Project results and experiences are con- verted into practical recommendations and decision support tools that can be directly used by the stakeholders in agriculture,forestry and dairy technology.

The project group RISE (Response-Inducing Sustainability Evaluation), has developed a tool to assess the sustainability of farms and at the same time identify possibilities for improvement.The RISE-tool was test- ed and used for the public and private sector by evaluating different farm types on five continents and in 14 countries so far.The holistic sus- tainability assessment follows a systems approach and identifies strengths (potentials) and weaknesses with regard to sustainability. As a monitoring tool, RISE can visualize trends and developments over time on individual farms as well as within regions and samples.

The International Institute for Sustainable Development contributes to sustainable development by advancing policy recommendations on international trade and investment, economic policy, climate change, measurement and assessment, and natural resources management.

Through the Internet, we report on international negotiations and share knowledge gained through collaborative projects with global partners, resulting in more rigorous research, capacity building in developing countries and better dialogue between North and South.

IISD’s vision is better living for all—sustainably; its mission is to champion innovation, enabling societies to live sustainably. IISD is registered as a charitable organization in Canada and has 501(c)(3) status in the United States. IISD receives core operating support from the Government of Canada, provided through the Canadian International Development Agency (CIDA), the International Development Research Centre (IDRC) and Environment Canada; and from the Province of Manitoba.The insti- tute receives project funding from numerous governments inside and outside Canada, United Nations agencies, foundations and the private sector.

Sustainable Agriculture – From Common Principles to Common Practice iii