--- signed a Sustainable Agriculture Contract ---

progress made towards sustainability over time by a farm that has signed a Sustainable Agriculture Contract3.

The IDEA method can also be used as an analysis tool by scientists and deci- sion-makers to compare sustainability between different types of farming or to compare the sustainability of production systems such as conventional and organic farming systems (Viaux,2003;Del’Homme and Pradel,2005).

At least, the methodological work conducted over the period 2000–2003 gave rise to a second version of the IDEA method (Vilain et al., 2003) to take account of certain specialized crops (horticulture, mar- ket gardening, arboriculture, wine growing). Authors note that on the basis of tests on farms and feedback, it must be recognized today that the IDEA method indicators have difficulty measuring the agro-ecologi- cal sustainability of farms specialized in horticulture or market garden- ing.The specific nature of farming practices in these two types of farm- ing system is at the moment not taken into account sufficiently in the current indicators of the method. 3.3. Implementation method and interest of discussion with groups of farmers This method can be implemented by a farmer under the supervision of an advisory officer. It can also be conducted by a farm advisor, on condition that the farmer collects the information beforehand (accounts,field pattern, etc.) and that the information is processed by the farm advisor. The tests conducted show that most of the values of the indicators can be deter- mined by the researcher in the presence of the farmer with a half day of work once the necessary documents have been gathered together.

Because of the construction of these indicators, different combinations of basic sustainability units from one farm to the next can result in the same score, thus enabling us to compare farms with radically differing patterns or practices.The interest of this resides in the fact that it allows individual monitoring over time while making it possible to conduct work in groups to compare farms with others and see how each of them can progress towards sustainability. It can also be of interest to have the whole group of farmers visit farms with interesting sustainability prac- tices. This provides an opportunity to go into the details of the whole production system and possibly identify the skills deployed to master the most sustainable techniques. 3 The Sustainable Agriculture Contract is the French contract to subscribe an agri-envi- ronmental measure.

Sustainable Agriculture – From Common Principles to Common Practice 101