--- ., 1996; Hurni, 2000; Sulser ---

measure the ability of the land unit to sustain the targeted function.

Assessments of farm sustainability should be objectively made in rela- tion to issues of agricultural sustainability.This, however, depends on the objective of the assessment and the scale of interest.The measurement of the sustainability of agro-ecosystems at the farm level is feasible (Gomez et al., 1996; Hurni, 2000; Sulser et al., 2001;Wiren-Lehr, 2001).

FAO (1976, 1984) also recommended some generic steps for land evalu- ation and land-use planning for different uses. The steps have been adopted by many studies particularly those for land suitability assess- ment (Bydekerke et al., 1998; Kollias and Kalinas, 1999; Kalogirou, 2002).

Studies on farm sustainability assessment procedures are still at the infancy stage though notable achievements have been made (Bouma, 2002; Bouma and Droogers, 1998; Dumanski et al., 1998; Dumanski and Pieri, 2000; FAO et al., 1997; Kirkby, 2000; Pieri et al., 1996; Steiner et al., 2000). SLM aims at harmonizing the complementary goals of providing environmental, economic and social opportunities while maintaining and enhancing the quality of land resources (Smyth and Dumanski, 1993).This harmony defines agro-ecosystems health.

The process and function of indicator development is aimed at finding descriptors for land biophysical processes such as erosion, crusting, runoff,compaction and salinization,fertility status,soil water status,input balance and other land management operations. Vo Wiren-Lehr (2001) has identified three main drawbacks to practical agricultural sustainabil- ity assessment:(1) the lack of systemic and transferable indicators which characterize agricultural and other ecosystems; (2) the deficit of an ade- quate evaluation of agro-ecosystems;and (3) the lack of principal guide- lines for the formulation of management advice for practical application.

The challenge is to select and define indicators that are significant descriptors of the status and trends of agro-ecosystems quality and are related to the processes caused by various land management practices (Eswaran et al., 2000).To this end, both qualitative and quantitative indi- cators can be identified, defined and used to assess farm sustainability.

Qualitative indicators should be used to backstop,streamline and develop quantitative indicators of farm sustainability.

Indicators and sustainability assessment If carefully crafted using transparent and standardized but flexible (scale and function dependent) protocols, agricultural sustainability indicators would be used for policy formulation, program development, environ- mental impact assessment and to promote technologies, policies and programs that ensure better use of natural resources and SLM.As point- Sustainable Agriculture – From Common Principles to Common Practice 53