--- impacts (e.g., Troeh, Hobbs and Donahue, 1980; Heywood, 1995; Steiner, ---

Looking at agriculture from the global as well as from a regional per- spective—in the South and in the North—we can see a sector with great potential, but also one under great pressure due to multiple, rap- idly unfolding interacting forces (Table 1).

Table 1: Growing pressures by 2030. • Global climate change (energy requirements) • Loss of fertile land (erosion, salinization, etc.) • Pollution and biodiversity loss • 1.5 billion more people, 1.5 billion undernourished • 2.5 billions living in water-stressed or water-scarce conditions • 50 per cent increase in demand for cereals and tubers • Doubling of demand for livestock in developing countries Sources: World Bank, CABI, FPRI, Rockefeller Foundation, IUCN, World Watch Institute (Vital Signs 2005, State of the World 2006), Meadows D. H. et al. 2004.

In the upcoming 25 to 50 years, rural areas will need to supply two to three billion more people than today with food (World Bank, 2003).

Providing this growing population with food will be the predominant role of farmers.However, as natural resources become scarcer, additional contributions of agriculture to society become recognized as merits. So far, the growing demand for food has largely been satisfied by agricul- ture through intensifying production systems and expanding the areas under cultivation. But this in a sense positive development has also caused negative effects. Overgrazing and inappropriate cropping have caused soil fertility to decrease in many places; large areas under agri- cultural production have been completely lost due to soil degradation.

The expansion of agricultural land has increasingly come up against eco- logical limits. Consequences of current production methods include a loss of biodiversity,overexploitation of natural resources and contamina- tion of soil, water and air, as well as other devastating environmental impacts (e.g., Troeh, Hobbs and Donahue, 1980; Heywood, 1995; Steiner, 1996; IAEA, 1997;World Bank, 2005).

To find a framework for dialogue and action upon these issues two hypotheses might be helpful (cf., Kesselring, 2003; Ruh and Gröbly, 2006; Stückelberger, 1999):

Hypothesis 1: Today the greatest pressure on agriculture is due to the globalization of markets.

Sustainable Agriculture – From Common Principles to Common Practice 5