--- Page 174 ---

3.1. Results concerning the economic dimension of sustainability The indicator for capital renewal measures the ratio of investment to total inventory of buildings, machinery and installations (= capital stock). It shows how many years it would take to replace the capital stock at the given rate of investment. Over time both capital stock and investment have decreased by around 10 per cent due to structural change. The results clearly indicate that capital stock is being renewed at the same rate now as at the beginning of the 1990s,(i.e.,on average every 25 to 30 years, see Figure 1).

The second indicator, for potentially arable land, demonstrates the trend in relation to agricultural land which represents a substantial basis for agriculture’s contribution to ensuring food supplies for the country’s population. According to land-use statistics, the total area of potentially arable land has fallen by 2.1 per cent over the past 15 years (see Figure 2).This corresponds to almost half the area of Lake Neuchâtel.Almost all the farm land lost has been used for housing and infrastructure, which means that to a large extent,land surface has become impermeable and the land lost to agriculture from a long-term point of view. It is the task of spatial planning legislation to protect potentially arable land.There are no tools within the scope of agricultural policy that can be used to stop this trend.

The third indicator, for labour productivity, serves to measure how effi- ciently the labour force works in Swiss agriculture. Between 1990 and 2004, productivity rose by 1.4 per cent each year (see Figure 3).

The general picture regarding the economic dimension of sustainability is as follows:

Indicators Assessment Capital renewal + positive Land (area) - negative (not the result of agricultural policy) Labour productivity + positive 3.2. Results concerning the social dimension of sustainability The indicator for education and training shows the trend in education among farmers. The data concerning people with practical experience, basic schooling and further training were obtained from the census car- Sustainable Agriculture – From Common Principles to Common Practice 161