--- Denmark, Finland, Norway and Sweden, while fertilizer levies are applied ---

payments is now imposed on Axis 2 (land management),which includes mainly agri-environmental, animal welfare, Natura 2000, afforestation and less-favoured area payments.

Charges and taxes There still appears to be only limited application of charges or taxes based on the environmental damage caused by agriculture,notwithstanding the endorsement by OECD countries of the polluter-pays-principle. This is in contrast with other sectors, where environmental taxes and charges are more common.The relatively rare application of pollution taxes in agricul- ture is commonly attributed to identification and measurement problems.

Unlike a factory where pollution can normally be monitored at “point” sources,pollution from agriculture is often more dispersed,originating from many different farms and exhibiting varying intensities.

Nonetheless, some examples of these policy measures do exist. Since 1998, the Netherlands has tackled the measurement problem by intro- ducing a range of levies on off-farm nutrient emissions above a set limit.

Since 2006,the system directly regulates the maximum amount of fertil- izers (animal manure pus maximum amounts of nitrate and phosphate) that may be used on the farm. The former system (MINAS) regulated emissions, not usage, to comply with the EU Nitrates Directive. More commonly,environmental taxes are applied on farm inputs.For example, various taxes and charges are currently levied on pesticides in Belgium, Denmark, Finland, Norway and Sweden, while fertilizer levies are applied in some OECD countries, including Sweden. Input-based taxes are gen- erally inexpensive to administer, but may be less effective than a tax on pollution itself,as they do not discriminate on the basis of actual loading on the environment.

Tradable rights Tradable rights based on environmental quotas, permits and restrictions also do not appear to play a significant role in agri-environmental policy, despite the growing use of such measures for environmental policy in other sectors (there is already experience with tradable CO2 permits within the energy sector). However, in the past decade the Netherlands has implemented systems of tradable permits in relation to the volume of manure produced by farms.

There are also examples of tradable schemes that are applied across a number of sectors, including agriculture. These include tradable rights for the development of wetlands (“Wetland Mitigation Banks”) in the U.S., Sustainable Agriculture – From Common Principles to Common Practice 207