--- Sustainability Solution Space (SSP) ---

One of the reasons might be that there is no consensus among researchers,policy-makers and farmers with respect to the selected indi- cators; no consensus on the point when they become sustainable; and no consensus on what indicators should be prioritized and thus, which strategies should be selected.

This paper shows how a transdisciplinary procedure can be applied to overcome some of the described problems. Hereby we rely on the methodology of Sustainability Solution Spaces (Binder and Wiek, 2001; Wiek and Binder, 2005) and on transdisciplinary methodologies ranging from participatory to collaborative and interactive social research (Scholz et al., 2006; Robinson and Tansey, 2006; Hirsch Hadorn et al., 2006; Rist et al., in press). We focus on the following of the afore- mentioned problem areas: (i) accounting for multi-functionality and multiple goals; (ii) selecting indicators; and (iii) defining what is sus- tainable, (analysis of the normative criteria). We also address the fol- lowing questions: 1.

How can multi-functional systems be represented and indicators derived? 2.

How can the indicators and their sustainability ranges be defined? 3.

Which indicators and their sustainability ranges are likely to vary across cultures? 2. Steps for constructing a Sustainability Solution Space (SSP) We sketch the core components of the SSP procedure (Table 1) that is elaborated in detail in Wiek and Binder (2005). Preliminary to construct- ing an SSP,we have to consider the function the sustainability space has to fulfill (prerequisite phase).Who will use this tool and for which purpos- es? That is, we depart from the final product we want to obtain: e.g., an SSP for policy-makers in the area of agriculture. The transdisciplinary approach in this prerequisite phase allows for including and balancing the different views and objectives stakeholders might have.

The method itself consists of a systemic, a normative and an integrative module (Table 1).The modules are interdependent; constructing an SSP is thus not a linear procedure but an iterative process.

Sustainable Agriculture – From Common Principles to Common Practice 37