--- How does the Sustainable Farm Tree® work? ---

that time, the image of the tree is only for farmers’awareness about sus- tainability.

It isn’t sufficient. Farmers want a tool to help them to make decisions according to sustainability stakes. In 2000, the Tree is improved: the tree is redrawn and accompanied by a set of questions collected in a note- book. Each question corresponds to one leaf of the tree. And the colour of the leaf varies according to the answers to the questions.

Year after year, the questions are improved or modified according to the feed-back of users.

A convention is signed between Trame and the users of the Sustainable Farm Tree: each year,Trame sends out a new version of the tree to users, and users send their comments and improvement requests. The possi- bility of a one-day meeting for the exchange of users’practices is offered annually.

One stake is to consider the systemic approach implied by sustainability:it is not possible to consider separately economy, social aspects and envi- ronment because these dimensions interact.Therefore, in 2006, the tree is redrawn.This version is presented to the INFASA seminar.

How does the Sustainable Farm Tree® work?

The Sustainable Farm Tree® is an aid-decision tool based on a qualitative approach, and, if possible, a collective use.

First step: to clarify one’s farm position by auto-evaluation Each farmer in a group under training for instance,has a listing of around 60 questions about the four dimensions of sustainable development: viability branch (economical aspects: subsidies dependency, income, etc.), transmissibility branch (transmission between generations of capi- tal and knowledge), liveability branch (social aspects: time for holidays, neighbourhood, commitment in associations, etc.) and reproducibility branch (environmental aspects:respect of air,water,landscape,old build- ings, etc.).

One by one, each farmer answers each question considering their own point of view and they give the answer to the group of colleagues. For instance, to the question: “do I sort out my wastes?” (reproducibility branch) a farmer answers:“I do not sort out my wastes, and it is not a problem for me.”The group reacts to the answer:“in my village,it is com- Sustainable Agriculture – From Common Principles to Common Practice 114