--- Millennium Development Goals (MDG) ---

5. Potential partnerships The following international initiatives listed in this section could provide some guidance toward the establishment of long-term partnerships for the collection, analysis and impact of agri-environmental indicators on sustainable development;the ultimate objective being to build capacity in countries and add value to the agricultural and environmental sectors. 5.1. Assessment and projects Millennium Development Goals (MDG) While the agricultural sector provides critical inputs to attaining the MDG targets, broad improvements in human capital needed to reach those targets might also provide an important foundation from which a considerably more productive and resilient agricultural sector can be developed. While most MDG targets are complementary, some might actually involve tradeoffs. For example, enhanced access to improved drinking water sources might collide, in some regions, with the goal of reduced hunger through increased irrigated agriculture. Similarly, several indicators of MDG 7, ensuring environmental sustainability, might well be adversely affected by efforts aimed at increasing agricultural and eco- nomic development that are important for the achievement of MDG 1.

MDG 7 covers a broad sweep,including biodiversity,critical natural habi- tats, energy use and global climate change, unsafe water and poor sani- tation, and urban slums. Agriculture is implicated both as a means to effectively address many of these problems, and as a source of and a contributory factor to the problems that MDG 7 was formulated to address.In this light,a judicious,comprehensive and participatory assess- ment of the environmental costs and benefits must be undertaken in the planning process for any agricultural development efforts.

The underlying driving force for environmental degradation through agri- cultural expansion and the harmful use of farming technologies is fre- quently poverty,rather than factors inherent to agriculture itself.If farmers realize personal economic benefits and also recognize the social benefits from environmental protection, they will respond to these incentives and employ environmentally-sustainable production techniques. However, sustainable agricultural practices must be profitable for this to happen.

Sustainable Agriculture – From Common Principles to Common Practice 228