--- Page 186 ---

1. Introduction The agriculture and agri-food industry has a close connection with the environment, and environmental issues are not new to the sector.

Canadians generally appreciate the environmental benefits that agricul- ture provides,including wildlife habitat,beautiful landscapes and natural processes such as nutrient cycling and water storage and filtering.

Growing global demand for agricultural products and the desire to increase the country’s share of these global markets has spurred signifi- cant changes in Canada’s agricultural industry. New production tech- nologies have been adopted and there has been a gradual shift towards larger, more intensified operations. Questions have been raised about the long-term sustainability of these production systems and their potential environmental costs. Issues such as water quality, wildlife habi- tat, biodiversity and greenhouse gas emissions are driving forces for all sectors of agricultural production to maintain acceptable levels of envi- ronmental stewardship. In some cases, heightened public concern now poses a direct constraint to agricultural growth. Similar concerns of greater numbers of global consumers are expected to increasingly affect the sector’s ability to retain and compete for international markets.

Consequently, agriculture today must balance a wide and continually evolving array of demands and environmental challenges.Governments, farmers and other stakeholders are working together to promote research, programming and related actions to address environmental concerns.The initial focus on conserving the natural resource base upon which agriculture depends—particularly soil, water and genetic resources for crops and livestock—has broadened to include other pri- ority areas such as the impact of pesticides and fertilizers, the potential entry of pathogens into water, the release of particulate matter, odours and greenhouse gases, wildlife habitat availability and the conservation of species at risk. Achieving the goal of long-term environmental sus- tainability in the agriculture and agri-food sector has become a more pressing and increasingly complex challenge. 2. Information for decision-making:

The role of indicators The individual decisions of agricultural producers have a direct influence on environmental sustainability. These decisions are influenced from Sustainable Agriculture – From Common Principles to Common Practice 173