--- Page 64 ---

Introduction Agriculture,which provides about 30 per cent of the GDP of Kenya,is prac- tised in less than 30 per cent of the country’s area of 583,000 km2. This leaves a large part of the country under heavily degraded landscapes and puts increasing pressure on the arable districts inhabited by more than 80 per cent of the population. The condition of the arable environments in the country is,therefore,crucial to sustainable agricultural production.The pressure resulting from intensive farming,increasing population and other forces of environmental degradation may require a methodology to assess the status of such agro-ecosystems.The ability of any farm unit to sustain arable agriculture while preserving its environmental status, referred to in this paper as agricultural sustainability is best monitored by agricultural sustainability indicators (ASI) which are quantitative or qualita- tive measures, pointers, attributes or descriptors representative of the agro-ecosystem condition and which convey information about the changes and trends in it.The changes are used to assess impacts of agri- cultural extension. Indicators are useful for both ex-ante and ex-post assessment (Pieri et al., 1996) of the sustainability of land management practices as well as in monitoring changes in the status of agro-ecosys- tems health. Sustainability of farm systems based on their environmental soundness, economic viability and social acceptability can be used to assess the impacts of agricultural extension (Rasul and Thapa,2003).

Sustainable land management (SLM) rests heavily on the maintenance of the inherent agro-ecosystems integrity,in turn affected by soil quality and the quality of other land resources. To understand efforts by extension service delivery towards sustainable agriculture, indicators are needed to assess farm sustainability.The aim,primarily is to enhance the ability of sci- entists and land managers to prevent land degradation, an undesirable outcome of unsustainable land management and negative land biophys- ical processes such as erosion and other forms of land degradation. Land degradation accelerated during the past decades despite efforts to reduce it. Many of the past attempts to understand degradation have focused mainly on biophysical factors. There is, therefore, a need to consider also socio-cultural and economic dimensions apart from biophysical elements only when addressing sustainable agriculture. Analyses and solutions must be location-specific in terms of biophysics,socio-economics,politics and even gender. To this end, conceptual frameworks would suffice.

Although indicators are already in regular use in many areas and disci- plines, those which evaluate changes in land resources quality at farm, national or regional levels still need to be refined.The challenge lies with the ability to select indicators that are significant descriptors of the status Sustainable Agriculture – From Common Principles to Common Practice 51