--- Battenfield, 1985; Meadows ---

As Figure 1 may illustrate, agricultural research is certainly needed.

The fact that in the painting it is “late autumn” may remind us that it is also high time for a practical and broad application of available knowledge. In the context of growing social, economic and ecologi- cal problems it becomes clear that only a responsible agricultural production, which makes wise use of all its resources, can meet the exigencies put forward by traders, processors and consumers. The demand for sustainable primary production is increasing as food safety and internal product quality are supplemented by the urge for ecological, ethical and socio-economic quality aspects (Boller et al., 2004). Sustainable production therefore epitomizes a holistic view of quality aspects; whereas not only the quality of the product but also of the production system is included. In its last consequence, the holistic approach must cover the entire supply chain. Thus, sustain- ability in all dimensions has become a most important guiding value for agricultural production.

Although currently fashionable and often abused,“sustainable develop- ment” and “sustainable agriculture” are not outworn or dusty notions.

They have evolved over the last 20 years (cf., Edens, Friedgen and Battenfield, 1985; Meadows et al., 2004), growing in importance relative to the political agenda at the international and national levels, with par- ticular emphasis on ecological concerns.

While the principle of sustainable agriculture is broadly accepted, the systematic consideration in practical farm management is still very limited (Pintér and Häni,2006).One major reason for this may lay in the frequent assumption that sustainability is merely an ecological concept.The result is a kind of “greenish”impression that marginalizes economic and social aspects.Not only are they at least as important as ecological aspects,but also the public awareness for them seems to be growing.

Before assessment tools are developed it is, therefore, necessary to define sustainability. A well accepted and probably the most broadly used one for sustainable development is the definition of the Brundtland Commission (WCED, 1987). At the Swiss College of Agriculture we found it to be a very good basis for our work (Häni et al., 2002, 2003a, b, c). Nevertheless, it has turned out that some key aspects are missing (they may have been included implicitly, but to become operational they have to be explicit). Three further dimensions were, therefore, added to the original definition (Stückelberger, 1999, modi- fied):“human dignity,” the (local) “natural environment” and the “global ecosystem.” Sustainable Agriculture – From Common Principles to Common Practice 7