--- The International Forum on Assessing Sustainability in Agriculture ---

Therefore, a basic definition of sustainable development can read as fol- lows (Häni et al., 2002, 2003a):

Sustainable Development allows a life in dignity for the present without compromising a life in dignity for future generations or threatening the natural environment and endangering the global ecosystem.

Transcribed for practical use in agriculture and to make it operational for assessment tools, the definition for sustainable agriculture reads (SAI, 2003, modified):

Sustainable agriculture adopts productive, competitive and efficient practices, while protecting and improving the environment and the global ecosystem, as well as the socio-economic conditions of local communities in line with human dignity.

Although numerous methods to evaluate sustainability on a global, national and local level (e.g., UN, 2001; OECD, 1997, 1999) and various environmental licensing and labeling options (ISO 14040, EurepGAP, Organic, etc.) are available, holistic management tools at farm level are still very rare. Most of the existing methods cover only single, specific quality aspects.Nevertheless,many of them are expensive and complex, often an exclusion criterion for small farmers. Furthermore, most audits communicate requirements rather than provide constructive criticism and intervention points for improvement.In addition, there has been lit- tle success so far in communicating to consumers the achievements as well as problems that agricultural production faces with regard to sus- tainability.

The International Forum on Assessing Sustainability in Agriculture (INFASA) is consequently focused on holistic assessment tools for practi- cal use and risk management at the farm level but also looks at their use- fulness for aggregation and political impact.The case studies presented during the first INFASA Symposium and published in this book explore the application of such management tools.

Holistic assessments provide farmers and other stakeholders with insight into ecological, social and economic aspects of farming and play a key role in advancing sustainability. It is important to begin analysis at the farm level, but in a way that allows information to be aggregated at various levels,including groups of farms,or the regional,national or inter- national level.

It is crucial that the farmer himself can see an added value and can ben- efit from an assessment. He is still the central, most important actor, at Sustainable Agriculture – From Common Principles to Common Practice 8