--- Environmental Quality Incentives Program (EQIP) was reauthorized in ---

port policies such as price support, such policies are likely to discourage the development of the organic sector.This is because such policies pro- vide incentives to adopt farming practices that increase production (quantity) rather than those, like organics, which stress quality. Moves to reduce the dominance of these forms of support will be of benefit to organic producers and reduce the need for continual payments for organic production.

It has also been observed that some payments have ended up subsidiz- ing basic environmental maintenance activities which, consistent with the polluter-pays-principle, should properly be carried out by farmers at their own expense. Payments in such cases tend to bestow a competi- tive advantage on the farmers who receive them, and thereby risk dis- torting agricultural production and trade.

A number of agri-environmental payment programs have been improved over time in the light of experience and improved informa- tion.For example,since 1990,enrolment in the major environmental land retirement payment program in the U.S.—the Conservation Reserve Program (CRP)—has been targeted according to the Environmental Benefits Index (EBI),which scores estimated environmental benefits rela- tive to costs.Further improvements were made to this system in 1996.In 2004, the Conservation Security Program provided payments and tech- nical assistance to promote conservation practices on farm land. The Environmental Quality Incentives Program (EQIP) was reauthorized in the Farm Security and Rural Investment Act of 2002 (Farm Bill) to provide a voluntary conservation program for farmers and ranchers that pro- motes agricultural production and environmental quality as compatible national goals. EQIP offers financial and technical help to assist eligible participants install or implement structural and management practices on eligible agricultural land. The Environmental Quality Incentives Program provides incentive payments and cost-shares to implement conservation practices for both livestock and arable operations.

The European Union’s agri-environmental payments are included in the “Second Pillar” of the Common Agricultural Policy (CAP), together with structural adjustment measures, less-favoured area payments and vari- ous rural development policies. Member States can choose among a long list of agri-environmental measures, selecting them based on their specific problems and priorities, as required, under the comprehensive monitoring and evaluation procedures for programs over the 2000 to 2006 period.Member States have recently produced a mid-term evalua- tion of these programs, which has been used to design the next gener- ation of Second Pillar programs for 2007 to 2013. A minimum share of Sustainable Agriculture – From Common Principles to Common Practice 206