--- 5.2. Financial Barriers ---

A Circular Agriculture and Agri-food Economy for Canada | 27 Canada’s Lake Winnipeg Basin due to phosphorus runoff on the Red River is an example of such externalities.136 Since producers, firms and households generally do not pay for these costs*, consumer food prices do not fully reflect their environmental impact.

The failure to fully account for the environmental costs of food production have contributed to artificially depressing the price of food. While this is beneficial for consumers (and from a food access perspective), it may reduce the urgency for new policies and regulations that encourage value creation from organic and in-organic waste materials which have a lower environmental footprint. Additionally, it could contribute towards food waste being considered an acceptable business expense instead of a potential cost-saving strategy.137 As a result, there is little incentive for the development of secondary markets designed to keep surplus, lower-quality food and by-products in use. 5.2. Financial Barriers Agriculture and agri-food businesses, especially SMEs, often lack the capital and financing required to develop more circular processes, products, and business models. This could either be due to the scale of the capital required-- industrial composting and recycling facilities, for instance, are very capital-intensive projects--or because circular technologies and business models are often new and unproven, with a large reliance on novel supply chains with uncertain demand for new products.138 Further, securing funding may also be challenging given that investors, banks, and funding agencies may be unfamiliar with circular projects. Financial institutions have historically not accounted for environmental risks such as soil degradation and biodiversity loss in lending portfolios. They also lack the tools to assess the value of novel production methods that can lead to positive financial returns. The lack of precedent also creates a perception of high market risk, further preventing financial decision-makers from investing in circular practices.139 5.3. Regulatory and Policy Barriers Regulatory and policy barriers can take many forms. Given the relatively new emphasis on circularity, existing regulatory and policy and frameworks may be inadequate to support a circular * Although some modest inroads have been made through agri-environmental cost-share programs and through the inclusion of nitrogen fertilizer and agrichemical manufacturing under federal and provincial output-based carbon pricing systems.

The transition to a circular agriculture and agri-food economy is hampered by many, often mutually reinforcing barriers that must be addressed across supply chains. agriculture and agri-food sector. Without the application of a circular lens, they may inherently promote the linear economy status quo. For instance, existing public food procurement policies may seek to minimize cost rather than use their market power to incentivize more circular food practices.

In other cases, policies have unintended negative consequences, which discourage the use of circular and regenerative practices.

For example, two of Canada’s largest agricultural business risk management programs (AgriInsurance and AgriStability respectively) have been found to unintentionally incentivize increased fertilizer and pesticide use, and reduce the incentive for producers to diversify their agricultural production (all else being equal).140 Finally, food products imported into Canada that don’t meet the legal requirements for labelling are not allowed to be sold or even donated, even though they may be safe for consumption.141 5.4. Institutional Barriers The agriculture and agri-food system touches on a number of closely related issues such as health and nutrition, environment and natural resources, finance and trade, and sanitation and waste management.142 These are currently by different federal government departments and agencies such as Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada, Health Canada, Fisheries and Oceans, the Canadian Food Inspection Agency and others, as well as by various levels of government – each of which has its own specific mandate. While important for accountability and specialization purposes, this division of labour hinders the coordination and collaboration that is required to send signals to markets and individuals about circular technologies, practices, and consumption behaviours.143 A lack of coordination can lead to each silo focusing on solutions that unknowingly work against each other, instead of achieving more holistic solutions. 5.5. Technology and Infrastructure Barriers Technological barriers are hard barriers that typically arise from the absence of technical solutions or the limited uptake and use of available and cost-effective solutions. There are numerous examples of how technology can be deployed to further circular practices. As mentioned in section 4, drone and remote sensors can be used at the farm level to support precision agriculture.

Another example is the use of digital technologies like blockchain that can enable more efficient food redistribution of better food inventory management, by for example identifying food surplus in a timely manner. Technological barriers may be especially relevant in Canada’s agriculture and agri-food given that it is largely made up of SMEs.144