--- University of Guelph’s graduate ---

A Circular Agriculture and Agri-food Economy for Canada | 35 Box 21 Skills, Training & Workforce Development As the agriculture and agri-food economy moves towards being more circular, it may require some new skills, training, and workforce development. For instance the development of technical skills such as those needed for the development and testing of new products from FLW, recycling of food packaging etc. In addition, some capacity building amongst financial institutions may also be required, so they are able to provide innovative financial solutions to meet the unique needs of the circular economy.

Governments can support the development of such skills through practical training pathways such as government-funded skills and training programs. Governments can also provide support through academic education pathways such as by introducing sustainable food education in high schools nationally and funding the development of circular thinking training or curriculum components for future food scientists as well as for students studying business, management, commerce and food preparation/handling related disciplines.188 University of Guelph’s graduate course on Innovation and Entrepreneurship in Agri-Food Systems 189 In 2019/2020 the University of Guelph began offering a formal course for graduate students with an interest in the circular economy. UNIV 6050: Innovation and Entrepreneurship in Agri-Food Systems is designed for students in the OMAFRA/UoG HQP Scholarship program, scholars from the Arrell Food Institute and scholars from Food from Thought. Space permitting, it is also open to any graduate student working on a thesis topic related to agri-food.

In this course, students work in groups to collaborate with NGOs, government agencies, or businesses on agri-food projects. Through these projects and a series of modules, students build knowledge and competencies in business development, communication, social innovation, project management and entrepreneurship.

Monitoring and Accountability Monitoring and accountability are key to track progress on visions, strategies, and targets outlined above. For example, a lack of accountability is often cited as the key reason for the quantity of food loss and waste currently generated.

One way to build accountability is by improving monitoring efforts. This largely depends on good data. Currently, there is limited availability and accessibility to data that tracks how circular the agriculture and agri-food economy is. While there are no universally recognized indicator of circularity to date, these could include, for example, indicators that measure the extent to which specific production practices advance regenerative agricultural principles; the extent to which food and other agricultural materials are recovered, reused and recycled; the value generated from valorizing surplus food and by-products, etc. To fill this gap, governments can independently or through partnerships with civil society and research institutes develop more open-source data sets with agronomic, climate, and market information.190 They could also legislate making FLW reporting by private businesses compulsory. Better data can further guide more informed policy, regulatory and legislative development as well as its implementation and evaluation.191 Data collected and packaged in user-friendly formats could also serve a number of other stakeholders. It could help farmers make more informed production decisions that could support regenerative practices.

On the consumption side, it could help consumers understand the impacts of their food choices and waste and build awareness that translates into more sustainable buying decisions. Finally, it could also help entrepreneurs to develop new contextually appropriate digital tools and business models to support circular practices in the agriculture and agri-food economy.192 Today, new digital technologies can greatly support data collections initiatives. For example, technological approaches such as blockchain can assist with authenticating, monitoring, or modifying food inventories in ways that could significantly reduce food loss and waste. Inventory management supported by good data can provide easier, real-time ordering, help capture value from unsold food, and can help track solutions that work at preventing, rescuing, and recovering food.193