--- Dutch Circular Agriculture Vision ---

34 | Smart Prosperity Institute
For instance, food innovation hubs that conduct R&D on new
upcycled food products can support linking food processors with
investors researchers and other businesses in the food supply
chain. They could also support business in accessing capital to
pilot new ideas. Further, they could provide an opportunity for
investors to act as brokers between ideas, projects, practices,
and a place where capital could be pooled to build out larger
projects.185
Box 19
Dutch Circular Agriculture Vision 181
In 2019, the Dutch Government announced its vision for
Circular Agriculture and set out the ambition of making
the Netherlands a global leader in circular agriculture by
2030. The vision entails a paradigm shift from aiming only
for growth in production volumes and cost reductions,
towards “optimisation in resource use and food
production in harmony with nature.” Practical components
of the plan to achieve this vision include:
• Improving soils and water quality
• Reducing emissions and pollutants
• Closing nutrient cycles
Collaboration at a regional level
• Collaboration along the agriculture
and food supply chain
The vision is intended to be inclusive and recognises the
need to offer new prospects for all types of agricultural
activities and for all farmers and growers, including
family businesses. The Dutch government hopes that
the transition to circular agriculture will stimulate new
economic activities and types of businesses, and they
have committed to working with all stakeholders in the
farm and food industry to create the necessary conditions
for a transition to circular agriculture and create room for
experimentation and learning.
Box 20
Guelph-Wellington’s Our Food
Future 186
In the City of Guelph-Wellington County region in
Ontario, the local governments are working with farmers,
innovators, researchers, businesses, tech and data experts
to explore the possibilities of making the existing local
food system more circular. Guelph-Wellington aims to
create Canada’s first “circular food economy” with three
bold goals:
• 50% increase in access to affordable,
nutritious food
• 50 new circular food businesses,
collaborations and social enterprises
• 50% increase in economic benefit by
unlocking the value of waste
Food hubs or clusters are another example of how partnerships
could be developed in the agriculture and agri-food sector.
These hubs promote the acceleration of networking and
industrial symbiosis between stakeholders at different levels
of the agriculture and agri-food supply chain. The growth and
development of such hubs could be stimulated by creating
development zoning and land-use planning policies to support
a mix of commercial, industrial and residential infrastructure
that would encourage symbiotic activity from food production
to consumption. As a result, could help reduce distribution
distance and can reduce food spoilage due to transportation.187
They could also enable efficiently pooling resources, allowing
members to share the costs and benefits of food and/or
bioenergy production.

Public Institutions
Around the world, circular economy policies and initiatives
have been driven by pioneering public institutions. Hence
strengthening these by making them nimble, risk-tolerant, smart,
and adaptable can make them more effective vehicles of driving a
circular policy agenda.183
Partnerships
While increasing circularity in the agriculture and agri-food
economy undoubtedly requires government support, it
cannot be achieved by government action alone. It will
require a collective effort from governments and public and
private researchers, public and private finance, small and
large businesses, and consumers among many others. Such
collaboration is key to push the transition forward and can take
many forms including public-private agreements, R&D clusters,
and voluntary industry initiatives.184