--- 6.3. GROW Policies ---

A Circular Agriculture and Agri-food Economy for Canada | 33
Box 18
reductions in their own operations but also influence suppliers
and bring about change in the whole food supply chain. For
instance, by shifting to increase sustainably produced healthy
plant-based food offerings, governments could signal the
importance of making dietary choices based on both human
and environmental health.171 In order to reduce food waste in
government institutions, procurement policies should consider
food ordering within the context of meal types and size options
for consumers. They could also encourage more timely food
purchasing decisions and consider the types and amounts
that can be eaten, alongside the cost factors that go into food
procurement decision-making. Where food waste is unavoidable,
procurement policies should include recommendations for food
donations.172 Governments could also consider supporting food
redistributors to develop the resources, skills and capacities
required to implement effective and efficient solutions for
rescuing safe edible food from government institutions.
Finally, governments can set an example by reporting and valuing
the lost and wasted food that they generate.173
6.3. GROW Policies
Unfortunately, not all good ideas that are researched and
developed convert into marketable goods and services. While
some ideas stumble in the early stages of innovation, many do not
reach commercialization due to prevailing market barriers such
as capital intensity, long timelines for investment return, and the
absence of a price reward. GROW policies seek to fill this gap by
helping firms secure the capital and business support required to
turn their ideas into market-ready solutions.174
As described in the financial barriers section above, circular
businesses, in particular, can struggle with access to capital. This
makes public investment or assistance in obtaining financing
a key government lever to enable circularity in the agriculture
and agri-food economy. Financial policy interventions in this
area include grants, loans, tax credits for capital investments,
and green bonds. In addition, governments could provide non-
financial business support such as technical and advisory support,
training, demonstration of best practices, and development of
new business models for circular solutions.175
Canada’s Food Waste Reduction
Challenge 176
In 2020, Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada launched
a $20M Food Waste Reduction Challenge, under
Canada’s Food Policy. This challenge aims to encourage
more solutions to food waste in order to increase food
availability, save consumers and businesses money, reduce
GHG emissions, and strengthen the food system. The
challenge is open to innovators of all types and sizes who
are developing business models that either prevent food
waste or that divert food waste, food by-products and/or
surplus food.
6.4. STRENGTHEN Policies
STRENGTHEN policies help to overcome systemic barriers that
are distributed throughout the innovation process. STRENGTHEN
policies fill in these gaps and reinforce the effectiveness of the
policies that stimulate ideas, convert them into marketable
solutions, and create the market demands for them. As a result,
they make the innovation ecosystem more effective and resilient.
They do this through creating visions and strategies, establishing
policy congruency and coherence, strengthening public
institutions, building partnerships, investing in skills, training
and workforce development and ensuring monitoring and
accountability. 177

Vision and Strategies
One of the important precursors to establishing circularity in the
agriculture and agri-food economy is setting a bold, inclusive,
and shared guiding vision. Such a vision should be supported
by concrete strategies built on both existing experience and
expertise as well as new research and ideas.178
Setting measurable targets is often proposed as the first step to
track progress on established strategies. For example, food loss
and waste reduction targets can be set as a driver for designing
out waste from the agriculture and agri-food sector. This target
could be set at the local, provincial and federal level. It could
also include sub-targets for retail businesses, manufacturers,
and consumers, to increase awareness and demonstrate a
commitment to act. In addition to setting their own targets,
governments could also consider measures to incentivize private
businesses, industry associations and other organizations active
along the food chain to create their own targets.179, 180
Policy Coherence
A common vision is also a foundation for greater policy
coherence. Agri-food businesses are often part of a complex and
spread-out supply chain that spans local, provincial, territorial,
and national boundaries. This implies that while municipalities,
regions and provinces with different mandates should develop
policies that serve their contexts, it is important that these are
harmonized and aligned as much as possible to avoid confusion,
duplication and inefficiencies. 182