--- Canada’s Artificial Intelligence ---

22 | Smart Prosperity Institute Canada’s Artificial Intelligence Super-cluster 114 Scale AI is a super-cluster for artificial intelligence development headquartered in Montreal, Canada.

The platform is currently funding several projects in relation to Canada’s food industry, including AI for customized packaging, a project focused on the efficiency of the supply chain for packaged goods. Farm to Market is a project tailored to the use of AI for farms and farmers looking at deliver, demand and access to markets. Rapid Distribution Capacity of Essential Cargo is another AI focused project seeking to provide solutions for supplying essential good at a rapid pace to the market. The development of AI technology for applications such as these can pave the way for better demand forecasting, improved delivery networks and more agile supply chains.

Food lifespan can also be increased through the use of innovation and technology. An increasing number of options are coming to market to help extend the life of perishable products, particularly fruits and vegetables. Some examples of these technologies include surface treatments to prevent spoilage (Box 6), hormonal storage options to slow ripening, and genetic modification for longer lifespans.

Appropriate food packaging and packaging procedures can also extend the life of food products ensuring the protection from microorganisms and oxygen.

Box 6 Apeel 115 Apeel has created an innovative treatment for produce that extends the life of produce up to twice as long by creating a barrier against oxygen.

The treatment is edible and made from naturally occurring material found in produce skins, peels and seeds. Apeel works with farmers, food brands and retailers to extend the life of fruits and vegetables.

Box 7 Box 8 Redistribution of Food for Human Consumption Despite the amount of food wasted every day, food availability remains is a significant issue for many communities.

Redistributing edible food for human consumption level addresses both food waste and food security. Much of the food waste throughout the supply chain is edible food that remains safe for consumption well beyond the best-before-date and can be rescued and donated. However, these products often do not make it to food rescue and donation platforms for reasons including fear of liability, lack of labour, and lack of transportation. Growing platforms and networks supported by technological solutions to facilitate food rescue can help address barriers (Box 7).116 Food Sharing Ottawa 117 Food Sharing Ottawa is a platform that was created to address food loss and waste in their community.

It aims to tackle several streams of food loss and waste, including, facilitating food donations from local retailers for distribution to community centres and food banks, and campaigning for the use of ugly produce that is not harvested due to its appearance and gleaning. The platform uses volunteers to collect food donations from retailers and other organizations, sort the collected items and distribute the edible donations throughout the community. To date, the platform has rescued 37,478 lbs of food.

Equipment Sharing Farm equipment and tools can be a large capital investment for farmers. They may also require regular and expensive maintenance. Much of this equipment is only required and used for short periods of time (although there may be considerable overlap in peak demand among producers). By creating sharing models for equipment, farmers can potentially save money and get greater use of these products (Box 8). Though the distance between Canadian farms is a barrier to equipment sharing, improved networks and collaborative mindsets may help increase equipment sharing in Canada. 118