--- 3.3. Social Benefits ---

14 | Smart Prosperity Institute
Figure 9: Direct emissions for food-related industries by final demand, 2015 75
Greenhouse Gases
The agriculture and agri-food sector emits greenhouse gases at
all stages of the supply chain.76 In 2019, the agriculture sector
contributed to 8.1% of the total CO2e emitted in Canada.77 A
majority of these emissions are generated during crop production
and by livestock (Figure 9).78 Food waste emit 56.5 million tonnes
of CO2e, of which 22.2 million tonnes is deemed potentially
avoidable and 34.3 million tonnes as likely unavoidable.79 Sources
of GHGs in agriculture and agri-food supply chain include burning
of fossil fuels for machinery for primary production (tractors and
vehicles), transportation (trucks, generators for climate control), and
the generation of electricity for food processing (milling, baking,
drying), storage (refrigeration), and retail (refrigeration, lighting).
Additional emissions come from soils as a result of microbial activity
that increases with fertilizer application, from ruminating livestock,
and from the decomposition of organic waste.
A more circular agriculture and agri-food system can reduce
GHG emissions through various pathways. By encouraging the
use of renewable energy, the circular economy can reduce the
dependence on fossil fuels for various uses through the agriculture
and agri-food economy. Regenerative agricultural practices such as
no-till and cover cropping can reduce emissions from soil. Further,
the use of production inputs made from waste material can reduce
the overall energy required for production. Increasing process
optimization during processing, manufacturing, transportation and
distribution can also lead to energy efficiency. Finally, reducing
food loss and waste can reduce methane emissions from organic
waste decomposition in landfills.

Land Use
A potential impact of the Canadian government’s goal of
increasing agricultural and agri-food exports is that more land
may be converted to agriculture. In Canada, the total area of
farms has been relatively consistent, declining slightly between
1996 and 2016 from 168 million acres to 158 million acres.80
This has been managed by increasing productivity. However,
the increase in production to reach Canada’s export goal may
well require converting new land for agriculture use. This would
result in emissions of carbon stores and biodiversity losses.
The application of circular practices at the primary production
level can minimize this land-use effect. Researchers at
Wageningen University in the Netherlands stress that applying
circular economy principles to agricultural production can
increase productivity and resilience, thereby reducing the
amount of land needed to produce the same amount of food.81
3.3. Social Benefits
Social benefits that emerge from the implementation of circular
practices in the agriculture and agri-food sector economy come
indirectly out of enhanced environmental health, increased
availability of food and the creation of jobs.
Food and beverage manufacturing, 7%
Crop production, 45%
Animal production, 42%
Food service and drinking places, 1%
Fishing, hunting and trapping, 1%
Farm products, and food and beverage wholesale
and retail trade, 3%