--- 6.2. PULL Policies ---

A Circular Agriculture and Agri-food Economy for Canada | 31
Horizon 2020 Programme 155,156
Horizon 2020 was Europe’s flagship research
programme aimed at securing Europe’s global
competitiveness through an emphasis on “excellent”
science, industrial leadership and tackling societal
challenges. A major focus area in Horizon 2020’s
‘Climate Action, Environment, Resource Efficiency and
Raw Materials Challenge’ was waste. Under this focus
area was research and action on developing a system
approach for the reduction, recycling and repurposing of
food waste.
A key research project funded by Horizon 2020 between
2015-2019 was “REFRESH: Resource Efficient Food and
dRink for the Entire Supply cHain”. REFRESH focused
on the reduction of avoidable waste and improved
valorisation of food resources. Backed by research to
better understand the drivers of food waste, the project
supported better decision-making by industry and
individual consumers. The project took an innovative,
systemic approach to curb food waste through a
holistic ‘Framework for Action’. REFRESH built on and
went beyond existing initiatives to develop, evaluate,
and ensure the spread of social, technological, and
organisational insights and practices related to food
waste. This was underpinned by guidance to legislators
and policy makers to help support effective governance
to tackle food waste.
6.2. PULL Policies
Currently, there is little market stimulation to grow the demand
for circular products and services, due to the environmental
externalities described in the market barriers section. PULL
policies aim to overcome these barriers by stimulating market
demand for environmental solutions through tools such as
regulations, pollution pricing, and procurement. While the
primary goal of such policies is to solve an environmental
problem, they also incentivize innovation. Further, if such
innovation can bring down the cost of achieving environmental
objectives, they also create competitive advantages. OECD
research on this topic has found that environmental policies that
drive innovation share key features including stringency, flexibility,
predictability, incidence, and depth.157
When designing such policies, it is equally important to
ensure that they don’t unintentionally hinder innovation.
Rigid compliance can discourage innovation approaches
and practices, while prescriptive policies that focus on the
lowest short-term cost can impede the development and/or
implementation of solutions that might have lower costs (and
environmental impacts) in the longer run.158 For instance, foods
imported into Canada can run into issues if the label does not
meet Canada’s legal requirements. In many cases, this results
in foods being sent to landfill rather than being able to be sold
or donated, even if the issue does not pertain to food safety.159
Where such policies exist, they should be reviewed and updated.

Regulations
A regulatory approach is often used in the agriculture and agri-
food sector. Where consumers are insensitive to price changes in
the markets, regulations can be used to drive change in the status
quo.
In the earlier stages of the food supply chain, a recurring cluster
of proposed regulations relate to date labelling. Date labels often
cause consumers to avoid buying or consuming foods that are
close to “best before”, “use by”, “sell by” and “expiry” dates. By
creating regulations that require food processors to differentiate
between expiry dates and “best before/use by/sell by” dates,
governments can provide greater clarity about what these labels
mean. They could also avoid confusion by improving the physical
placement of the text, legibility, and consistency of formats. This
in turn could reduce the unnecessary disposal of safe and healthy
food, either by consumers or businesses who remove them
prematurely from their shelves.160
Box 15
Box 16
California’s Law on Food Data
Labelling 161
In 2017, the state of California in U.S.A passed a law to
standardize date labels on food. The law encourages food
manufacturers, processors, and retailers to use the terms
“BEST if Used by” or BEST if Used or Frozen by” to indicate
quality, and “USE by” or “USE by or Freeze by” to indicate
safety.
Regulations could also be used to tackle the ever-growing
problem of packaging waste, including from the agriculture and
agri-food sector. While food packaging plays an important role in
helping to retain and optimize the value of food by extending its
shelf life, it generates a significant amount of waste. To mitigate
this waste, governments could create regulations that enable
the development and use of more environmentally friendly
packaging. They can also introduce the practice of Extended
Producer Responsibility where those who manufacture and
distribute the packaging are assigned full financial and physical
responsibility for their packaging waste162 (versions of this are in