--- Scaling Up Your Vegetable Farm for Wholesale Markets ---

8 www.SARE.org Resources Most state Extension services will have both specialists and resources available to help you meet your business planning, financing and marketing needs. In addition, the following publications are available through SARE.

This bulletin was written by Marion Simon, Kentucky State University, and Andy Zieminski, SARE Outreach. SARE would like to thank the authors of Building a Sustainable Business for their valuable contributions: Gigi DiGiacomo, Robert King and Dale Nordquist, all of the University of Minnesota. It was produced by Sustainable Agriculture Research and Education (SARE), supported by the National Institute of Food and Agriculture (NIFA), U.S. Department of Agriculture under award number 2020-38640-31524. USDA is an equal opportunity employer and service provider. Any opinions, findings, conclusions or recommendations expressed in this publication are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the view of the USDA.

Building a Sustainable Business: A Guide to Developing a Business Plan for Farms and Rural Businesses This book provides in-depth guidance on the steps to creating a business plan. It includes dozens of worksheets to help you create a unique plan for your operation. www.sare.org/business Farmers’ Guide to Business Structures This book walks you through the process of identifying, creating and maintaining the best legal structure for your farm business. www.sare.org/business-structures Organic Transition: A Business Planner for Farmers, Ranchers and Food Entrepreneurs If transitioning to organic is one of your goals, this book will lead you through each step of the planning process.

Though not a comprehensive guide to the certification requirements of the USDA National Organic Program, the book assists you in creating an actionable transition plan for your enterprise. www.sare.org/organic-transition Building Sustainable Farms, Ranches and Communities: A Guide to Federal Programs for Sustainable Agriculture, Forestry, Entrepreneurship, Conservation, Food Systems and Community Development This guide lists funding opportunities offered by federal programs. It is indispensable for anyone seeking government help to foster their innovative enterprise in forestry or agriculture. www.sare.org/resources/building-sustainable-farms-ranches-and-communities Cultivating Climate Resilience on Farms and Ranches This bulletin will help you understand the potential impacts of climate change at the farm level and how you can use your farm’s resources to adapt to the challenges and pursue new opportunities. www.sare.org/cultivating-resilience Scaling Up Your Vegetable Farm for Wholesale Markets This bulletin guides you through the likely changes you’ll need to consider when planning to branch out into wholesale markets, such as expanding your operations and working with new customers. www.sare.org/wholesale-marketing Transitioning to Organic Production This bulletin introduces you to the requirements of the USDA National Organic Program and outlines many of the key strategies producers use to make their three-year transition to organic production a successful one. www.sare.org/transitioning-to-organic United States Department of Agriculture National Institute of Food and Agriculture