--- Strategic Planning and Evaluation ---

6 www.SARE.org and vision. It should be general and short, typically no more than 3–5 sentences.

Think about how you’ll use your mission statement as you create it, because this can shape what you say and how you say it. For example, are you using it as an internal document to guide decisions, or do you plan to share it with lenders or customers to help them learn about your products and practices?

Goals The last part of this task involves setting goals. Recall your vision for how the farm will look and operate in the future. Your goals are specific targets for making your vision a reality. In this step you should think about your personal, family, business, financial and environ- mental goals.

Think about what you want your farm to look like in the future, what you want to be doing with it, who you want involved, and so on. Your goals can be a mix of short, medium and long term. Goals that have a good chance of success are written using SMART guidelines. This means they are specific, measurable, achievable, realistic and timely. They should address the “who,” “what” and “why” for each area of your business (marketing, operations, human resources and finance). Goals don’t address “how” you will achieve your future vision.

To complete the involved level of planning required in task 4, you may need to go beyond your management team and consult with lenders, Extension agents or other specialists. Photo by Christopher Willis, USDA Task 4:

Strategic Planning and Evaluation IN TASK 3 YOU IDENTIFIED WHAT YOU WANT TO achieve with your farm business. Now it’s time to make a plan for how you’ll do so. Here you will: • Develop a business strategy. What realistic set of actions will you take to reach your goals? • Evaluate strategic alternatives. Will your plan result in an improvement over your current situation, especially in terms of time or finances? • Decide on a whole-farm course of action.

Are you ready to implement your plan? If not, will you brainstorm new ideas or stick with your current situation? • Develop contingency plans. How can you adapt if you find out things are not going as you expected?

This is a very involved and complex task. The amount of information you need to compile here is similar to planning task 2, and it will be in the same four functional areas: marketing, operations, human resources and finances. Except this time, you’ll conduct detailed research on things like potential customers, competitor prices and the resources you need to implement your strategies. You’ll also make projections about things like sales volumes, your labor and capital needs, input expenses, cash flow and profitability.

Planning task 4 in Building a Sustainable Business (pgs. 103–231) includes in-depth guidance and many worksheets to help you gather the information needed to create your business strategy. Task 4 worksheets ask detailed questions to help you answer questions in these areas: • Marketing: markets, products, competition, dis- tribution and packaging, pricing, promotion, inventory and management Your goals are specific targets for making your vision a reality.