--- Environment and Planning E: Nature and Space ---

Sustainable agriculture and food systems Comparing contrasting and contested versions 21  Chatham House effects (due to pollution and landscape homogenization arising from monocultural production66). This means that there is no simple linear relationship between environmental impact and the intensity of production: instead, a range of key local thresholds may be encountered, beyond which environmental impacts accelerate.

Thus, while intensification is certainly feasible, the degree to which environmental impacts decline absolutely (compared to relatively), and thus the extent to which intensification is truly sustainable at scale, remain debatable.

Second, the technologies required to produce elevated yields are often socially contested – whether these are advanced biotechnological approaches such as gene editing, or wider genetic modification, or impacts on animal welfare (e.g. through increased confinement), or aspects of precision agriculture that have implications for rural labour, data provision and ownership, or unequal access to capital investment.67 So, technological innovation is a necessary but insufficient step towards scaling that technology into widespread use. What is increasingly recognized is that the technology forms a small part of ‘bundles’ of social, political and financial innovation that are necessary to take an invention into widespread use, and to navigate the inevitable trade-offs between different dimensions of impact (economic, environmental and social).68 Furthermore, recent literature emphasizes a lack of ‘silver bullet’ solutions in this area.69 The sustainable intensification literature further emphasizes a number of key points. First, it is claimed that sustainability and intensification should be given equal weighting,70 whereas operationally they rarely are. The second common assertion is that sustainable intensification applies to the whole system (growing more, sustainably) and that, in some places, de-intensification will be necessary to reduce current environmental impacts.71 Yet, in practice the discourse more normally centres on raising yields and increasing environmental efficiency, and not on reducing yields and gaining environmental goods. Third, sustainable intensification has three key steps: efficiency gains, a greater substitution of agroecological for synthetic processes, and system redesign for sustainability.72 Yet the prime focus to date has been on efficiency gains for more profitable agriculture.

Assumption 5: Land sparing is enabled by sustainable intensification Framing: There is a significant empirical literature that underpins the ‘land sparing’ approach: that both biodiversity/environmental goods and agricultural production are maximized by separating land for nature from land for agriculture.

This separation allows the intensification of agriculture on a smaller area than 66 Fischer, J. et al. (2014), ‘Land sparing versus land sharing: moving forward’, Conservation Letters, 7(3), pp. 149–57, https://doi.org/10.1111/conl.12084; Benton et al. (2021), Food system impacts on biodiversity loss. 67 Booth, R. (2021), ‘Pathways, targets and temporalities: Analysing English agriculture’s net zero futures’, Environment and Planning E: Nature and Space, 4(1), https://doi.org/10.1177/25148486211064962. 68 Barrett, C. B. et al. (2020), Socio-Technical Innovation Bundles for Agri-Food Systems Transformation, Expert Panel Report, Ithaca, NY, and London: Cornell Atkinson Center for Sustainability and Springer Nature, https://hdl.handle.net/10568/110864. 69 Ibid. 70 Garnett et al. (2013), ‘Sustainable Intensification in Agriculture: Premises and Policies’. 71 Buckwell et al. (2014), Sustainable Intensification of European Agriculture. 72 Pretty et al. (2018), ‘Global assessment of agricultural system redesign for sustainable intensification’.