--- Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs (DEFRA) stated in its 2018 ---

Sustainable agriculture and food systems Comparing contrasting and contested versions 15  Chatham House technologies is often the best route.28 This view is sometimes extended to imply that if on-farm productivity is not maximized via new technologies, farms become inefficient and wasteful, and their farmers should make way for productivity-focused agriculturalists who can maximize a nation’s comparative advantage and thus contribute to maximizing its economic growth. Farmers who do not meet such expectations may therefore be subject to forms of peer pressure.29 Such a discourse on maximizing productivity mainly through new technologies is articulated across the world. For example, in the case of England, the UK Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs (DEFRA) stated in its 2018 white paper Health and Harmony: the future for food, farming and the environment in a Green Brexit:

There is a huge opportunity for UK agriculture to improve its competitiveness – developing the next generation of food and farming technology, adopting the latest agronomic techniques, reducing the impact of pests and diseases, investing in skills and equipment and collaborating with other farmers and processors. We want our future policy to provide an enabling environment for farmers to improve their productivity and add value to their products, so they can become more profitable and competitive.30 The assumption that demand growth requires productivity growth entrenches the view that increasing scale and intensity of farms is a necessary, unidirectional component of agriculture: farms should get ever bigger, and ever more technologically developed, in order to maximize productivity, and small, inefficient farms should disappear. According to the summary of a 2016 workshop organized by the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development and Policy Department B of the European Parliament:

Conventional agro-political discourse and scientific theory (especially agricultural economics) generally understands structural change as being a uni-directional process that involves the gradual disappearance of small farms and an associated enlargement of large farms. This process is also understood as involving the continual replacement of labour by capital and technology. For decades the main focus of agricultural policies at both the national and supra-national levels has been to support and encourage structural change. At the same time structural change has generally been perceived to be an inevitable process and all the available statistical material from the Western [member states of the EU] seems to unambiguously support such an interpretation.31 28 Country Smallholding (2008), ‘Farmers ‘have moral duty to help feed the world’’, 19 February 2018, https://www.countrysmallholding.com/grow-and-maintain/farmers-have-moral-duty-to-help-feed-the- world-8250134. 29 Sutherland, L.-A. et al. (2012), ‘The ‘Neighbourhood Effect’: A multidisciplinary assessment of the case for farmer co-ordination in agri-environmental programmes’, Land Use Policy, 29(3), pp. 502–12, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.landusepol.2011.09.003. 30 UK Department for Environment, Food & Rural Affairs (2018), Health and Harmony: the future for food, farming and the environment in a Green Brexit, p. 7, https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/ uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/684003/future-farming-environment-consult-document.pdf. 31 European Parliament Directorate-General for Internal Policies (2016), ‘Research for Agri Committee – Structural Change in EU Farming: How Can the CAP Support a 21st Century European Model of Agriculture?’, Workshop, p. 16, https://www.europarl.europa.eu/RegData/etudes/STUD/2016/573428/IPOL_STU(2016) 573428_EN.pdf.