--- Sustainable agriculture, Version 2: Agroecological approaches with ---

Sustainable agriculture and food systems Comparing contrasting and contested versions 27  Chatham House Examination of the key assumptions underpinning the framing of Version 2 Given the narrative above, this section will examine the key assumptions underlying Version 2 together with their critiques. Table 3 provides a summary, and is followed by a more detailed discussion of each assumption in turn: these are each subdivided into two sections, headed ‘Framing’ and ‘Critique’.

Table 3. Sustainable agriculture, Version 2: Agroecological approaches with land sharing and sparing, enabled by demand reduction through adopting healthy, sustainable, low-waste food consumption Key assumptions Critique Demand can be changed and should be shaped by social needs through regulatory change, leading to structural change in markets.

Demand can change (or be changed), but is difficult, both politically and for reasons related to incumbency.

The current unsustainability of farming is a form of market failure that can be corrected.

There are many policy levers that could restructure the market to internalize externalities (see IPCC (2019), special report on ‘Climate Change and Land’, Table 5.6)88 but power dynamics and politics make them difficult to deploy.

A healthy diet is also a (more) sustainable one.

Although this may be the case, it is not necessarily so.

Agroecological approaches can provide sufficient nutrients for healthy diets, without impinging on natural habitat if consumption patterns change.

This is possibly true, but it would require very radical structural change in terms of both markets and behaviours, and therefore may be implausible.

Agroecological approaches are more sustainable than sustainable intensification.

Like-for-like comparisons show agroecological farming to have less impact at both farm and landscape scale, but the lower relative yield means more land is needed if the same amount is to be produced. Sustainability at the system level is contingent on demand.

Source: Chatham House research.

Assumption 1: Demand can be changed, and should be shaped by social needs Framing: Given the increasing evidence that existing food systems are unsustainable for health and for the environment, and valuation exercises which show that the total systemic costs outweigh the benefits,89 there is a growing recognition that dietary change is necessary as a common solution to human and environmental 88 Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (2019), ‘Climate Change and Land’. 89 Lord, S. (2019), Valuing the impact of food: Towards practical and comparable monetary valuation of food system impacts, Oxford: Food System Impact Valuation Initiative, https://foodsivi.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/01/ FoodSIVI-Report-Valuing-The-Impact-of-Food-1_2019_12_18.pdf; National Food Strategy (2021), The Plan; Benton and Bailey (2019), ‘The paradox of productivity’; Willett et al. (2019), ‘Food in the Anthropocene’; Swinburn et al. (2019), ‘The global syndemic of obesity, undernutrition, and climate change’.