--- Wellesley, L. and Froggatt, A. (2019), ---

Sustainable agriculture and food systems Comparing contrasting and contested versions 12  Chatham House demand in the market, there is a strong discourse around innovating ‘alternative proteins’ as a market-led way to replace one form of production with another, less resource-intensive, one. Hence, there is an important drive to innovate in, among other things, non-soy plant proteins (e.g. peas), industrial bio-fermentation (fungi, bacteria), algal systems (seaweed and single cells in closed systems), and insects (as generic protein, for human and livestock feed), as well as cellular and other forms of ‘meat’.18 Examination of the key assumptions underpinning the framing of Version 1 Given the narrative above, this section will examine the key assumptions underlying Version 1 together with their critiques. Table 2 provides a summary, and is followed by a more detailed discussion of each assumption in turn: these are each subdivided into two sections, headed ‘Framing’ and ‘Critique’.

Table 2. Sustainable agriculture, Version 1: ‘Sustainable’ intensification and land sparing to meet inevitably increasing global food demand Key assumptions Critique Demand is exogenous and will increase as population size and wealth increase.

Given health externalities, as well as environmental ones, past patterns are not a strong guide to future demand. Diets can change rapidly (e.g. as a consequence of nutrition transitions or the COVID-19 pandemic).

Growing market demand requires productivity growth to raise supply.

Market failure can be corrected by structural change to deliver better public goods, reducing aggregate demand.

Dietary change is difficult and is not the preserve of policy.

Given the right levers, diets can change rapidly. Diets (like tobacco and alcohol use) should be shaped by social needs.

The potential for technologically led sustainable intensification is substantial.

Technically this may be true, but operationally it may create trade-offs (e.g. greater yields may require absolute increases in inputs, even if they are relatively more efficient). More focus should be given to ‘what is grown’ than to ‘how more can be grown’.

Land sparing is enabled by sustainable intensification.

Intensification is more likely to enable land clearance than land sparing, through spillover effects.

Source: Chatham House research. 18 Wellesley, L. and Froggatt, A. (2019), Meat Analogues: Considerations for the EU, Research Paper, London:

Royal Institute of International Affairs, https://www.chathamhouse.org/2019/02/meat-analogues.