--- Page 9 ---

legacy phosphorus.48,73,74 Similarly, phosphorus is present as different species in aquatic systems. The
soluble, reactive phosphorus fraction (orthophosphate) is directly available for biological uptake.
Orthophosphate is also more readily recoverable using phosphorus treatment technologies applied in water
and wastewater treatment systems, whereas the non-reactive phosphorus fraction is less studied. However,
consideration of this fraction, which can comprise the majority of phosphorus in some water matrices75,76,
is important for sustainable phosphorus management. Collaborations between biologists and engineers
within the STEPS Center can advance efforts to manage and utilize these ‘lost’ phosphorus fractions more
efficiently. For example, different physical, chemical and biological approaches can be used to facilitate
phosphorus transformations to the target form.75

In nature, phosphorus transformations occur at varying rates. Engineered systems can accelerate such
processes to facilitate efficient phosphorus removal, recovery and reuse in agriculture. For example,
wastewater treatment facilities create conditions to remove phosphorus either chemically or biologically.
Chemical transformation often involves adding iron or aluminum salts to precipitate phosphorus, where
soluble phosphate (e.g., PO43-) is transformed into a solid form (e.g., AlPO4(s)). Phosphorus transformation
can also derive from physical-chemical processes, including oxidation processes. Redox reactions involve
the transfer of electrons between chemical species. In water, phosphorus is typically present in the +5
valence state such that phosphorus bonds are not specifically targeted by oxidation. However, when
phosphorus is incorporated in complex organic material, advanced oxidation processes may facilitate
phosphorus recovery by partially oxidizing the phosphorus-containing materials into molecules more
susceptible to hydrolytic conversion to phosphate or completely oxidizing the organic to yield phosphate.75
A wide array of advanced oxidation processes have been tested as a means of breaking down complex or
recalcitrant organics in water. These processes feature the generation of powerful oxidizing radical species
such as hydroxyl radicals (OH⋅) capable of mineralizing organics to simple components such as PO43-, water
and carbon dioxide.
Electrochemical processes are a type of advanced oxidation processes that use direct current to generate
chemical reactions in-situ by transferring electrons from an anode to a cathode (Fig. 6a). This negates the
need for transportation and storage of auxiliary chemicals. In electrooxidation, non-active electrode
materials such as boron-doped diamond or Ti4O7 are often used to yield oxidation processes via direct
oxidation on the electrode surface or indirect oxidation by hydroxyl radicals or other oxidants generated in-
situ.77 Mallick et al. observed that electrooxidation featuring direct electron transfer was able to transform
soluble non-reactive phosphorus to reactive forms, although the presence of organics in the water matrix
interfered with process efficiency.76 The soluble reactive phosphorus compounds containing organic
phosphoester P-O-C bonds were more susceptible to oxidation compared to inorganic anhydride P-O-P
bonds.78 Notably, complete conversion of non-reactive phosphorus to orthophosphate required high
electrooxidation energy inputs such that incomplete conversion, when advanced oxidation is already in
place as part of the water treatment regime, may be the most relevant means of implementation.

An example of biological transformation involves Polyphosphate-Accumulating Organisms (PAOs) in a
process known as enhanced biological phosphorus removal (EBPR). PAOs take up soluble phosphate and
transform it into intracellular chains of phosphate that are called polyphosphate (poly-P) (Fig. 6b). PAOs
are unique because they can hyperaccumulate phosphorus to levels exceeding 15% of a cell’s total dry
biomass. In water resource recovery facilities (WRRFs), the most common PAOs are Candidatus