--- Page 2 ---

Abstract
Feeding the growing human population sustainably amidst climate change is one of the most important
challenges in the 21st century. Current practices often lead to the overuse of agronomic inputs, such as
synthetic fertilizers and water, resulting in environmental contamination and diminishing returns on crop
productivity. The complexity of agricultural systems, involving plant-environment interactions and human
management, presents significant scientific and technical challenges for developing sustainable practices.
Addressing these challenges necessitates transdisciplinary research, involving intense collaboration among
fields such as plant science, engineering, computer science, and social sciences. Here, we present five case
studies from two research centers demonstrating successful transdisciplinary approaches toward more
sustainable water and fertilizer use. These case studies span multiple scales. Starting from whole-plant
signaling, we explore how reporter plants can transform our understanding of plant communication and
enable efficient application of water and fertilizers. We then show how new fertilizer technologies could
increase the availability of phosphorus in the soil. To accelerate advancements in breeding new cultivars,
we discuss robotic technologies for high-throughput plant screening in different environments at a
population scale. At the ecosystem scale, we investigate phosphorus recovery from aquatic systems and
methods to minimize phosphorus leaching. Finally, as agricultural outputs affect all people, we show how
to integrate stakeholder perspectives and needs into the research. With these case studies, we hope to
encourage the scientific community to adopt transdisciplinary research and promote cross-training among
biologists, engineers, and social scientists to drive discovery and innovation in advancing sustainable
agricultural systems.

Introduction
Feeding the growing human population in a sustainable way and in a changing climate is one of the most
important challenges we face in the 21st century. Without substantial shifts in the agricultural practices on
a global scale, we risk surpassing the planetary boundaries including freshwater use and biogeochemical
flows of nitrogen (N) and phosphorus (P).1 Currently, the best croplands are already under cultivation and
much of the remaining land is unsuitable for farming. In addition, most of this cropland is rain fed, making
crops vulnerable to unpredictable weather patterns. Other key inputs controlling plant productivity, such as
synthetic fertilizers are often overused, with only a fraction effectively reaching the plants, while the
remainder is lost to the environment.2 Moreover, the rate of productivity improvement for many of our most
important crops is slowing down.3 Ensuring a healthy future for the people and the planet requires a deeper
understanding of crop-based agriculture systems and their response to the environment.

Agriculture involves managing complex living systems embedded within complex ecological, societal, and
economic systems that operate at multiple scales (Fig.1). At the farm level, management practices rely on
predictive modeling, supported by measurements taken from soils and individual plants and the associated
organisms that make up their microbiomes. Transitioning to a regional scale, effective coordination of
shared resources such as land and water, alongside the development of policies, is essential to ensure
sustainable production. On the global scale, concentrated efforts are necessary to address challenges
including climate change and equitable food distribution, thereby ensuring food security worldwide.
Changing agricultural practices would require an intense collaboration of all disciplines involved in these
systems, including plant science, engineering, and computer science. Furthermore, given that agricultural
outcomes impact everyone, this transdisciplinary effort must involve diverse fields of economics, policy,
social sciences, and the engagement of various stakeholders including farmers and consumers.