--- Page 8 ---

Scalable field endophenotyping for high-throughput screening of plants
To accelerate advancements in breeding new cultivars for increased yield, nutritional value, resource
efficiency and resilience, it is necessary to develop technologies that enable high-throughput screening of
plants and their associated organisms at molecular, tissue and whole-organism scales across time and space
in the field. This process of measuring plant processes generates large datasets that have been useful in
building genomic predictions for crop improvements.62 Most plant phenotyping tasks have historically
required manual effort, demanding a tedious and skilled workforce for completion.63 Over the last decade,
however, there has been a significant shift toward robotics and automation for high-throughput screening.64
Efforts to estimate leaf area, color, shape, biomass, temperature, nutrient status and plant growth have seen
the introduction of technologies such as ground-based robots, aerial drones and gantry systems. These
systems are equipped with optical, hyperspectral and thermal imaging, as well as LIDAR and 3D scanning
capabilities.63–66 However, critical processes within the plant system remain inaccessible to interrogation
and modulation for in-situ and in-field, and across diverse genetic backgrounds. For instance, current
phenotyping efforts predominantly focus on visualization, leaving internal traits, or endophenotypes,
largely unexplored. Moreover, while there is considerable focus on above-ground plant parts, below-ground
aspects receive less attention due to technological constraints. Additionally, the existing robotic solutions
are often rigid, whereas the nature of plant handling demands a delicate and gentle approach. To address
these challenges, engineers and computer scientists in CROPPS are developing tools for in-field and high
throughput interactions with above- and below-ground components of plant systems, as shown in Fig. 5.

Understanding water relations within plant tissue is necessary to enable improvement of crops function
relative to resilience and sustainability of water use. Leaf water potential has been shown to impact
vegetative growth and yield, particularly during extreme drought conditions, making it a promising trait for
improving water-use efficiency in plants. Specifically, the water potential of the living tissue between the
xylem and the stomata plays a critical role in plant function but has been largely inaccessible due to a lack
of tools. Recently developed nano-reporter (AquaDust) enables in-situ and non-destructive measurement
of water potential at this interface, providing unprecedented access to in-planta water status in a minimally
invasive manner.67 The nano-reporter is infiltrated into the leaves and transduces the local water potential
into a fluorescent spectral signal. AquaDust has been successfully used in maize68 and tomato69, showing
its potential as an endophenotyping method for crop development and has informed modeling efforts aimed
at understanding water transport in plants. To enable automated and high-throughput endophenotyping
using AquaDust, we are currently developing a soft-robotic system capable of automated leaf infiltration.
The system consists of a soft gripper capable of autonomously infiltrating leaves with liquid solutions by
gently squeezing them. In addition to enabling intimate interaction with the canopy, we are exploring
approaches to access below-ground phenotyping, which faces significant challenges, primarily due to the
sensitive nature of the plant rhizosphere.70,71 Accessing this zone without disrupting the soil ecosystem
proves difficult, with very few existing solutions for underground manipulation.72 To address this, we are
developing scalable underground soft robots capable of accessing roots and the rhizosphere with minimal
damage, thereby establishing a direct connection with roots and the microbiome.

Phosphorus recovery from aquatic ecosystems
Phosphorus can be present in many different forms (e.g., inorganic/organic, soluble/particulate) that dictate
its behavior in water and soil matrices. In soils, many phosphorus species are present either as phosphate
complexed with iron and other metal ions or are contained within organic molecules often referred to as