--- Page 6 ---

necessary for agricultural productivity. Since crops have not been utilizing most of the applied fertilizers,
it will be necessary to find strategies to either make soils less phosphate-limited or to more efficiently
fertilize crops and reduce excess phosphorus leaching into the environment. Biomaterials, such as
functionalized hydrogels and nanofertilizers are potential avenues to solve this problem, especially when
co-created with biologists.

Functional hydrogels can be designed to cleave soluble, bioavailable phosphates from complexes. STEPS
researchers have synthesized an organophosphate-degrading functionalized hydrogel by crosslinking
poly(maleic anhydride-co-methyl vinyl ether) (PMAMVE) with ethylene diamine and reacting the
remaining maleic anhydride units with with hydroxylamine.49 This process forms hydroxamic acid
functional groups within the PMAMVE gel. We evaluated the performance of the PMAMVE gels in
decomposing dimethyl nitrophenyl phosphate (DMNP), an organophosphate molecule. The decomposition
of DMNP in the maleic anhydride gels followed pseudo-first-order kinetics for all studied conditions. The
spatial confinement of the hydroxamic acid groups inside the gel influenced the performance. The gels
made of PMAMVE copolymers modified with hydroxamic acid offer a robust new system with high
degradation efficiency, scalability and simple preparation. Current efforts toward creating materials that
degrade organophosphates involve modifying the PMAMVE gels with deferoxamine (Desferal) and UiO-
66 (Universitetet i Oslo) metal-organic framework. Once optimized by chemists and biologists in the
STEPS Center, this hydrogel has the potential to improve phosphorus bioavailability of complexed
phosphate that is already present in soils.

A second avenue of designing novel fertilization methods involves nanofertilizers. Per IUPAC
(International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry), a nanoparticle is classified as a particle with a size
less than 100 nanometers in any one of the threedimensions.50 Engineered nanoparticles often have new or
novel physical or chemical properties compared to their bulk scale counterparts. There are essentially two
main methods to synthesize them: top-down and bottom-up. The former involves grinding bulk material
into the nanoparticle size while the latter synthesizes the material on the scale of nanometers using base or
precursor materials. Top-down processes include different kinds of milling such as planetary or unitary ball
mills. Bottom-up methods build from molecular or atomic clusters to nucleate and grow the desired
nanoparticle. Bottom-up processes include chemical precipitation, sol-gel method co-precipitation,
hydrothermal synthesis, microemulsion and electrochemical synthesis.51 To further enhance the properties
of nanoparticles, they are often surface modified or functionalized, a process in which inorganic and organic
molecules are added to its surface, depending on the covalent or polar nature of the nanoparticle.52,53

In agriculture, functionalized nanoparticles are useful methods for obtaining controlled-release fertilizers.
Nanoparticle controlled-release fertilizers exhibit better absorption and utilization of nutrients when
compared to commercial fertilizers. Avila-Quezda et al. showed that nanofertilizers can reduce
eutrophication due to loss of nutrients, exhibit a higher diffusion and solubility rate and have better
controlled release properties when compared to commercially available controlled-release fertilizers.54

Recent work in the field has found that macronutrients such as N, K, P, Ca, Mg, and S can be combined
with nanomaterials to enable the delivery of a specific quantity of nutrients to crops.55 For example,
Tarafdar
et
al.
used
phosphorus in tricalcium
phosphate
to
synthesize
fungal-mediated