--- Finding the Right Cover Crop Mix in West Texas ---

www.sare.org SARE 2023/2024 REPORT FROM THE FIELD 7 SOUTHERN SARE The cover crop practices tested in this project … demonstrate the potential to provide high-quality forages to supplement livestock production dur- ing critical periods.

Reagan Noland, Texas A&M AgriLife Extension THE CHALLENGE Semi-arid regions in western Texas are subject to wind and drought, which can dry out soils, reduce water-holding capac- ity and lead to erosion. Dryland, no-till wheat rotated with cotton and followed by grain sorghum and non-alfalfa hay crops is common in Texas’ Concho Valley, along with livestock production and ranching.

As adoption of conservation management practices has grown in this area, many farmers are intrigued by cover crops but need regionally appropriate information on how to grow them. If a dual-use legume cover crop could be incorporated into sea- sonal crop rotations, producers in the area would benefit from improved soil health and supplemental forage for cattle, goats and sheep.

THE ACTIONS TAKEN Reagan Noland, an agronomist with Texas A&M AgriLife Extension, wanted to find the right cover crops to meet the chal- lenges of farming throughout western Texas. He has used two On-Farm Research grants to evaluate various cover crop spe- cies for warm and cold seasons. Noland worked with four farms in the Southern Rolling Plains and Permian Basin regions to conduct cowpea and sunn hemp tri- als for the warm season and hairy vetch, Austrian winter peas and sweet clover for cool seasons. Each crop was planted with common grass crops cereal rye and pearl millet to evaluate changes in bio- mass production, soil benefits and forage potential. While research showed that the warm-season combination of legume covers and grass did not yield substan- tial biomass and wasn’t well suited to the Finding the Right Cover Crop Mix in West Texas region, cool-season legumes showed more promise. Legumes, particularly Austrian winter peas, planted with a lower seeding rate of cereal rye, increased total biomass and reduced weeds.

THE IMPACTS Noland is encouraged by the results. While the research didn’t determine a one-size- fits-all solution for the region’s farmers, Noland believes there is a strong oppor- tunity for cover crop establishment there, particularly if livestock are integrated to convert the forage to an added value stream. Specific impacts include: • Reducing inputs: Increasing overall biomass through legume cover cropping improves nitrogen sequestration and may offset the need for synthetic fertilizers. • Future research: Trial data showed the importance of seeding rates for the right cool-season legume and grass mix, but more research is needed to determine proper rates for success in such a chal- lenging environment. • Farmer interest: When much of the cotton crop in western Texas failed in 2022 due to intense drought, several farmers reached out to the program for advice, demonstrating a clear interest in the area for low-risk cover crop options.

Learn more: See the related SARE projects OS19-131 and OS20-138.

Top: Texas A&M Agronomist Reagan Noland (holding the plant), along with farmers attending a field tour, looks at nitrogen- fixing nodules on the roots of a vetch plant. Right: Nitrogen- fixing nodules on the roots of leguminous cover crops. Photos by Steve Estes, Texas A&M