--- experience with Integrated Pest Management (IPM). This ---

Higher yields may be achieved by increased use of fertilizers and pesti- cides. Inappropriate applications of these fertilizers may pose a high risk for pollution of the water resources. An increased N-fertilization will fur- ther demand higher pesticide applications because of higher disease pressure.Therefore good farm management practices, awareness of the principles of Integrated Pest Management (IPM),and education of those who are involved in pesticide application are prerequisites to avoid pos- sible problems in the domain of ecology and health.

Tea yield could also be increased and kept at a more constant level through irrigation. However, irrigation during the dry season might require major investments into irrigation equipment.Increased irrigation of the tea crop could lead to a competition for drinking water in the dry season, and water scarcity may result as a problem in the future.

Additional aspects Some other issues that have arisen from the RISE evaluation are dis- cussed in short: ● Child labour as such is not present in the tea plantations. But since salaries are very low and there is a lot of work available for women (plucking is a job exclusively done by women),children must help out with the workload in most households, which is difficult to assess and evaluate. ● To get closer to an environmentally sound production several actions can be suggested: – Some farmers have a good knowledge of and practical experience with Integrated Pest Management (IPM). This potential needs to be supported and further developed and the knowledge about IPM practices has to be dis- persed among other farmers. – For the application of pesticides, appropriate education or training should be mandatory. Education will reduce mis- takes and undesirable side effects while increasing the effectiveness of pesticide applications. Additionally, the risks of built up resistance can be diminished with correct application. – The red spider mite Tetranychus cinnabarinus is a problem on big estates (with several hundred hectares) in the Nilgiris district, although tea is only a secondary host for this pest (CABI, 2002). This may be the result of a reduced biodiversity because larger fields lack ecological compen- Sustainable Agriculture – From Common Principles to Common Practice 144