--- Page 225 ---

It is not an easy task to determine the level of agri-environmental pay- ments in OECD countries. There are payments directly attributable to environmental protection or the enhancement or conservation of natu- ral resources, while other agricultural policies are related directly or indi- rectly to the environment (for example, natural disaster, general services and regional assistance). Cross-compliance plays an important role in Europe and the U.S. Moreover, environmental regulations affecting agri- culture are significant in most OECD countries. From the OECD classifi- cation of support—based on how policies are implemented, not in terms of declared policy objectives—the data are presented in Table 1.

Expenditures on agri-environmental programs have increased in most OECD countries since the mid-1990s.In 2000,total monetary transfers to the agricultural sector as a whole—measured as the total support esti- mate (TSE) for OECD countries—amounted to US$321 billion and the producer support estimate (PSE) amounted to US$243 billion.In 2005,the respective figures were US$385 billion (TSE) and US$280 billion. As measured by the PSE, payments to farmers for addressing environmen- tal issues in agriculture have increased since the mid-1980s from one per cent to around four per cent of OECD support to producers.These per- centages are dominated by market price support policies provided through trade measures, but would account for around 20 per cent of support if only government budgetary transfers were considered.

Moreover, these figures do not include agri-environmental spending in other areas,such as research,training,advice;costs associated with regu- latory measures; or payments to which environmental “cross-compli- ance”conditions are attached.

There is a great diversity of agri-environmental payments across OECD countries and regions. In practice, agri-environmental payments tend to be linked to on-farm practices associated with certain environmental outcomes. Payments directly based on environmental outputs such as “improved landscape” or “more diversity” are rare. Since the 1990s, many European countries and the U.S.have greatly increased their use of such measures.Some notable trends include the growing use of payments to support the adoption of less-intensive farming practices;land retirement payments to promote environmental objectives; and transitional pay- ments to assist farmers in implementing structural changes intended to benefit the environment. By contrast, in some countries, payments are made through community-based schemes involving local governments and other community groups.

Sustainable Agriculture – From Common Principles to Common Practice 212