--- Page 255 ---

deficiencies and potentials in specific places and farm types. Because sustainability is highly contextual, the interpretation of results received through standardized methodology requires the consideration of the existing framework conditions.Target setting,selection of indicators,and appropriate aggregation algorithms are some of the key methodologi- cal issues that surface at all levels. A holistic, systems-based yet practical approach to assessment is key, as sustainability decisions often involve tradeoffs. The need to understand such tradeoffs and to capitalize on win-win situations necessitates a broad-based view of socio-economic and ecological parameters and linkages.

As some of the examples presented at the Symposium have illustrated, motivations for developing and using assessment tools may vary. At the farm level, indicator systems can detect deficiencies as well as strengths and thus support management decisions. This can lead to improved specific practices whether related to cropping systems, farm economics or social conditions.However,producers are also increasingly drawn into adopting measurement tools associated with farm environment plans and certification systems.In the case of farms having long-term industry contracts, monitoring key indicators is necessary to meet corporate management standard and quality requirements. Here, market expecta- tion is important, as both regulators and ultimately consumers are increasingly interested in food meeting social and environmental crite- ria. Furthermore, the public today expects stronger evidence to demon- strate positive impact, rather than be content with a green or socially responsible image. Weak evidence may even undermine claims to the positive effects of socially and ecologically beneficial farming practices.

Standards, certification and payments for agro-ecosystem goods and services are prominent policy areas that require a strong evidence base.

From a policy point of view, the viability and impact of the agricultural sector as a whole is of interest. Therefore some assessments address higher organizational levels. Such assessments should build on informa- tion that is relevant to the farm level, but also include measures that are of primary interest to decision-makers involved in higher level policy making.

The policy demand for better information on agricultural sustainability is diverse.Sustainability evaluation can support premium schemes,paid for by willing consumers expecting agricultural products to meet higher sustainability standards. There is also growing interest in payments for services arising from the multi-functionality of agriculture,which need to meet tough criteria to ensure green box compliance related to trade agreements. An excellent example of a well-administered policy Sustainable Agriculture – From Common Principles to Common Practice 242