--- The colouration of the Sustainable Farm Tree® ---

pulsory.Have you checked for your area?”Or:“in my place,wastes are col- lected by a firm to be recycled, I am sure it is possible for you to do so.” Therefore, the farmer argues, discusses and usually takes into account the remarks of “peers,”where expert advice would be rejected.It is a way for farmers to find ways to improve the sustainability of their practices.

Indicators are proposed to farmers when they have difficulties answer- ing a question (for instance, if soil in winter with green cover < 20 per cent of the total surface area,it is suggested to make sure that erosion is under control on the farm).The use of indicators is neither systematic nor compulsory: farmers can ignore them).

It means that the Sustainable Farm Tree® is based on auto-evaluation, the glance of peers being the way to settle limits and thresholds. The group is the guarantor of the consistency of the answers of each farmer.

It is a way to make farmers responsible and autonomous.

Figure 1: Process of decision to answer a question of the Sustainable Farm Tree®.

The colouration of the Sustainable Farm Tree® presents a global image of the farm After having answered each question, farmers are invited to synthesize their answers by colouring the leaves of the Sustainable Farm Tree®.

Each question of the farmer notebook corresponds to at least one uncoloured leaf of the tree.For instance,“do I sort out my wastes?”corre- sponds to one leaf on the reproducibility branch (environmental aspect); whereas “do I use renewable energy sources”corresponds to two differ- ent leaves of the tree:one for the branch “reproducibility”and one for the branch “viability,” because energy management on farm has environ- mental and economical impacts.

The farmer answers in front of his colleagues (peers) Next question Use of the indicators Are there ways to improve?

If the answer is "yes, this point is one of my forces" If the farmer has difficulty answering If the answer is "no, this point is a problem for me" Sustainable Agriculture – From Common Principles to Common Practice 115