--- Page 171 ---

and nature of resources that must be conveyed to future generations.

Uncertainties exist,in particular concerning natural resources.For natural resources it is appropriate to attach utmost importance to the principle of precaution. Accordingly, natural resources must be used carefully. At the same time, substitution of non-renewable resources by renewable natural resources must be actively sought. Furthermore, renewable nat- ural resources must be used in such a way that they can be regenerated, and human resources (knowledge) and reproducible resources must be actively and continuously renewed. Finally, the limited nature of all resources demands their efficient use.

Another central element of the sustainability concept is an equitable welfare distribution, not only between present and future generations, but also within the present generation. Equity within the present gener- ation refers both to distribution within Switzerland and to distribution between industrial and developing countries.

Sustainable development should be a guiding principle at all levels of society. Each individual must make a contribution, but so should the economy and State.As a sector,agriculture can make a contribution.The size of agriculture’s contribution depends on a combination of factors including its own sustainability practices.The following paragraphs show what agriculture’s contribution can be and what framework conditions are necessary. The text is structured around three key sustainability themes:“resources”,“efficiency”and “equity.” Resources Agriculture’s role in society is expressed in the corresponding constitu- tional mandate.Agriculture has to make a substantial contribution to the provision of food to the population, to the conservation of natural resources and the upkeep of rural landscapes as well as to a decentral- ized settlement of the country. By providing these goods and services, agriculture contributes to the welfare of society.

For agriculture to fulfill this mandate, the following three groups must make a contribution.

Farmers In the production process,farmers must use natural resources carefully – the ability of natural resources to regenerate must be preserved (soil fer- tility, biodiversity, etc.). Also, they have to renew reproduced resources (farm buildings and equipment, machinery) regularly, and within the Sustainable Agriculture – From Common Principles to Common Practice 158