--- Page 212 ---

manure, and outputs, mainly the uptake of nutrients by crops and pasture). Nutrient surplus has generally decreased, reducing environmental pressures on soil, water and air. Most of the countries that have record- ed large decreases in nutrient surpluses, are, however, mainly those with the highest nutrient use, indicating there is still room for improvement. Rising or large nitrogen surpluses are commonly a result of the inten- sification of livestock production, since another sur- plus source, nitrogen fertilizer, is generally decreasing in most countries. Due to the accumulation of phos- phorus in farmed soils and its slow transport time, concentrations in water could continue to rise, even while phosphorus surpluses are diminishing. – Pesticide use (active ingredients). Although evidence on the environmental effects associated with pesti- cide use is not widely available across OECD countries, existing data suggest a link between a decrease (increase) in pesticide use and decreasing (increasing) harmful effects. Although pesticide use has increased in some countries, pesticides have changed over time and many of them are today less environmentally harmful. However, the persistence in the environment of some older pesticides (e.g., DDT atrazine and deriv- atives) remains a concern, although these products are now banned in some countries. – Energy. Energy consumption on farms in OECD coun- tries has increased by six per cent between 1990 and 2003 compared to an increase of 17 per cent recorded for other sectors. Energy consumption has grown at a higher rate than farm production, reflecting contin- ued expansion of mechanization and increasing machinery power. Energy subsidies, mainly for on- farm fuel use, are widespread and a disincentive to reduce energy consumption and use energy resources more efficiently. Thus, the potential benefit of lowering greenhouse gas emissions is lowered. – Water use. Agricultural use has grown more rapidly than for other users, mainly driven by a 6 per cent expansion in the area irrigated in some countries.

Sustainable Agriculture – From Common Principles to Common Practice 199