--- Page 117 ---

and the INRA Nancy-Colmar “energy” indicator (Pervanchon et al., 2004).

For other indicators, experts other than the authors were asked to give an opinion on the calculated values and scores.

Certain difficulties relating to scoring and weighting were attenuated thanks to the tests that were conducted. These tests also provided an opportunity to check that the method allowed fruitful exchanges with the farmer or between farmers, thus leading to the experimental validation of its use-value. It fulfils its purpose if it prepares farmers to develop a better understanding of the mechanisms they will have to implement and to identify more clearly the factors on which they will be able to act if they should decide to undertake the switch towards sustainable agriculture.

The expected progress concerns primarily the socio-territorial indicators which are an innovative approach for which there are currently few refer- ences, and the analysis of the relations between these indicators and the other indicators.There is the question,for example,of a more comprehen- sive approach to the family as a collective group,the employment created locally by farming activity, hygiene and safety at work or even the topical issues of food safety.Regarding economic sustainability,the small number of indicators is explained by an intentional choice to limit ourselves to simple indicators expressing primarily the economic conditions necessary for the medium and long-term survival of the farms.This was considered as being guided in the long term by agro-ecological and social conditions.

But it is obvious that the choice of practices that are respectful of the envi- ronment or the development of synergies on the scale of the territory have consequences in economic terms for the farms.

Conclusion, prospects for use and for related research IDEA method is now accepted as being a tool that is easy to use. It pro- vides a simple, faithful diagnosis tool that is sensitive and operational and gives a global analysis of the farming system.

These first results have been completed by studies conducted by some French agricultural organizations which wish to appropriate the IDEA method by testing it and to hold debates on sustainable agriculture on the basis of this awareness-raising and training tool. Moreover, French secondary and higher agricultural education now use this tool in peda- gogical training to explain the concept of sustainable agriculture to their students and test it with farmers.

Sustainable Agriculture – From Common Principles to Common Practice 104