--- Symposium of INFASA in Bern, where Einstein had his ---

experiences—among scientists and developers as well as users—in order to improve and adapt the tools. INFASA thus strives for the appli- cation of indicator and assessment systems in the field, in order to advance sustainable agricultural production from a broadly accepted principle to a common practice.

INFASA is an open platform, welcoming the participation of all stake- holders (farmers,the agri-food and supply industry,retailers,governmen- tal bodies, consumers, NGOs). Furthermore, INFASA will provide a forum where concrete applied research programs can be conceptualized in response to the needs of specific audiences. We are quite aware that working together with such different interest groups may be more com- plicated than individual initiatives. But the goal is not necessarily una- nimity. Einstein stated, that “the day where all participants express the same opinion, is a lost day.”Therefore we are most thankful that the first Symposium of INFASA in Bern, where Einstein had his annus mirabilis,3 wasn’t a lost day.What is indeed needed for a more sustainable agricul- ture are new alliances, cooperation and joint strategies, in particular in industrialized countries, where farmers—just like cultural institutions— are often heavily dependent on the goodwill of fellow citizens.

It is much more than a simple coincidence that the first INFASA Symposium took place at the Zentrum Paul Klee in Bern (ZPK), a site of cultural interest to which the Swiss College of Agriculture has both an intensive relationship and interest in terms of intertwining with the for- mer’s societal mandates. The concert given at the ZPK during the Symposium connected classical and modern music with topics of art and nature in order to reflect the fact that sustainable agriculture has a much older history than the sole existence of the term might imply.The music that included pieces composed specifically for this event was not only part of an added “cultural program,”but also thought of as an inte- gral part of the Symposium and an inspiration for all participants.

Hopefully, the few selected paintings of Paul Klee in this paper (at the Zentrum Paul Klee some 4,000 more are waiting to be discovered) will be a rich source of inspiration for the scientific and practical work of the readers. 3 Einstein had his marvellous year in 1905 (e.g.,“Special Theory of Relativity”and paper on light quantum theory for which he earned a Nobel prize in 1921).

Sustainable Agriculture – From Common Principles to Common Practice 14