--- WOCAT and AQUASTAT ---

WOCAT and AQUASTAT The World Overview of Conservation Approaches and Technology’s (WOCAT) mission is to provide tools that allow Soil and Water Conservation (SWC) specialists to share valuable knowledge in soil and water management.This assists specialists in their search for appropriate SWC technologies and approaches, and supports them in making deci- sions in the field and at the planning level.

AQUASTAT is FAO’s global information system of water and agriculture developed by the Land and Water Development Division of FAO. The objective of AQUASTAT is to provide users with comprehensive informa- tion on the state of agricultural water management across the world, with emphasis on developing countries and countries in transition. 5.4. FAO and the private sector The FAO Director-General has stated that:“the challenge of food security can only be resolved through a global partnership involving national, international, public, private and voluntary sectors” (FAO and the Private Sector, 2007). A healthy private sector and well-functioning markets are key factors for economic growth and the sustainable development of the agriculture, food, fisheries and forestry sectors.

Currently, FAO works with a range of international and national private sector partners of the agriculture and food chain. It also actively pro- motes policies in member countries that foster private investment and private sector growth.The private sector is an important ally in our fight against hunger. The much needed financing and investment to attain the MDGs will have to come, for the most part, from private resources and investment.

FAO seeks to increase private sector participation in food security and other agricultural development programs through partnership activities that can help achieve: ● policies that facilitate private sector development and invest- ment.Economic,regulatory and administrative policies need to address the concerns of the private sector, creating an environ- ment for healthy business activity; ● improved capacity for entrepreneurship in developing coun- tries. Most of the new investment needed to achieve the MDG of reducing hunger will be at the farm level. Farmers often lack human and capital resources to start or expand their business- Sustainable Agriculture – From Common Principles to Common Practice 233