--- Page 229 ---

revealed through indicators of pest management and environ- mental farm planning. Coupling indicators can also provide a means to verify the validity of the change in direction of a given indicator.For example,if the nitrogen surplus balance is showing a rising trend,then it would be expected that this would also be reflected in increasing trends for the ammonia and elements (methane,nitrous oxide) of AEIs for greenhouse gases. ● Modelling. Governments are increasingly interested in model- ling the effects of different policy instruments on environmen- tal (and other) outcomes, in order to establish which policies are most effective at achieving environmental objectives at least cost. The indicators that are needed in this context need to be specified at a much finer resolution than those that track broad trends. ● Ease of interpretation. In order to clearly communicate the state and trends of environmental conditions in agriculture to policy- makers and the public with the least amount of ambiguity, there need to be limits on the number and complexity of AEIs.

This is because data needs vary considerably among different groups (for example, researchers need more expansive infor- mation than policy-makers and the public, both of which require more condensed indicator sets). Efforts to develop “headline” environmental indicators by some countries are a step in this direction.They attempt to provide a set of indicators that can become as familiar as economic and social indicators such as inflation and employment rates; and can reconcile the need for indicators that address specific agri-environmental issues within a country or group of countries, provide compar- ative information across countries, and are amenable for use in policy-modelling.

A challenge for policy-makers is to determine the highest priority invest- ments in monitoring and reporting capacity given limited resources and the large array of “policy relevant” environmental issues faced by gov- ernments. This involves moving from physical measures of agricultural impacts on the environment to a set of economic or monetary measures of impacts.

Developing a system of national accounts to reflect the full economic costs and benefits to society of agricultural activities on the environment would enable the comparison and evaluation of different environmental issues, which is not completely possible with the use of physical meas- ures. Hence, a system of national accounts would make it possible to Sustainable Agriculture – From Common Principles to Common Practice 216