--- Baratta, M. von (ed.), 2003, ---

all involved stakeholders is of paramount importance. RISE can serve as a key tool for such a dialogue by visualizing the holistic performance of farms.The RISE assessment has been able to generate valuable manage- rial information relevant to Indian tea producers and processors.Overall, the project underlines the practical flexibility of RISE as a holistic, com- prehensive and worldwide applicable tool.

The application of RISE on the small sample of Indian tea farms confirms that this relatively simple tool allows for identification of strengths and weaknesses with regard to ecological, economic and social aspects of sustainability. The tool can detect important intervention points and therefore act as a response-inducing tool. It has to be noted, however, that the conclusions are limited to the farms analyzed and to get a rep- resentative picture, well-defined larger samples of farms would have to be evaluated. As could be shown in other projects, e.g., in China, with larger and more representative samples, RISE is also a very valuable tool at higher organizational levels and especially for political objectives (Häni et al.,2003a;Studer et al.,2006).Recommendations may target spe- cific farming practices as well as framework conditions in a way to achieve more sustainable agriculture.

Bibliography Baratta, M. von (ed.), 2003, Der Fischer Weltalmanach 2004.Fischer Taschenbuch Verlag,Frankfurt am Main.

Boller, E. F., J. Avilla, E. Joerg, C. Malavolta, F. G.Wijnands and P. Esbjerg, 2004a, Guidelines for Integrated Production,Principles and Technical Guidelines. 3rd Edition, IOBC wprs Bulletin,Vol. 27(2).

Boller, E. F., F. Häni and H-M Poehling, 2004b, Ecological Infrastructures:

Ideabook on Functional Biodiversity at the Farm Level. IOBC, LBL Lindau, pp. 213. Extracts available at: http://www.shl.bfh.ch/fileadmin/docs/ Forschung/RISE/ideabook.pdf.

CABI (Commonwealth Bureau of Agriculture International), 2002, Crop Protection Compendium, (2 CD-ROMS). CAB International,Wallingford, Oxon, U.K.

Daniel, O., A. Desaules, R. Flisch, G. Gaillard, F. Herzog, G. Hofer, P.

Jeanneret,T. Nemecek, H. Oberholzer,V. Prasuhn, M. Ramsauer,W.

Richner, B. Schüpbach, E. Spiess, U-P Vonarburg,T.Walter and P.

Weisskopf, 2003,“Agrar-Umweltindikatoren,Machbarkeitsstudie für die Sustainable Agriculture – From Common Principles to Common Practice 146