--- Mabel Brelje: Certified ---

13 BUILDING A SUSTAINABLE BUSINESS Mabel Brelje: Certified organic small grain, corn, and soybean grower located in Glencoe, Minnesota. Mabel began the planning process shortly after receiving organic certification in 1998. At that time, her planning needs were three-fold and revolved around human resources, operations and marketing issues. Her primary planning issues concerned: (1) chronic labor and equipment shortages; (2) lack of established, reliable markets; and (3) the need to find a buyer for the farm.

Frank Foltz, Northwind Nursery and Orchard:

Edible landscape nursery stock grower and marketer located in Princeton, Minnesota. Frank had operated his family business for 17 years when he drafted a business plan to ready the catalogue portion of his business for sale to an outside buyer and to map out a long-term plan for on-farm nursery stock sales, tourism, and homesteading education.

Dave and Florence Minar, Cedar Summit Farm: Large- scale dairy graziers located in New Prague, Minnesota. They operated the farm together for 30 years before preparing a business plan in 1999-2001. The Minars’ primary planning objective was to evaluate on-farm milk processing as a strategy to reduce year- to-year income volatility and to create permanent work for several of their adult children. Dave and Florence shared their worksheets and business plan with MISA.

You will see examples from their planning experience and their final business plan for the newly created Cedar Summit Creamery throughout this Guide.

Greg Reynolds, Riverbend Farm: Organic Community Supported Agriculture (CSA) vegetable grower and marketer located in Delano, Minnesota.

Greg was in his fourth growing season when he sat down to write a business plan as part of the MISA review process.

His critical planning issues were human resources and finance related. Greg struggled with seasonal labor and cash- flow constraints. Throughout the planning process, Greg considered two strategy alternatives: hiring labor and purchasing labor-saving equipment to address his seasonal shortages.

Mary Doerr, Dancing Winds Farm: On-farm goat cheese producer and bed and breakfast operator located in Kenyon, Minnesota. Mary had been operating her farm business for 14 years prior to developing her business plan as part of the MISA review process. At the time, Mary’s planning objectives included improving financial management, increasing the number of B&B guests, and developing an apprentice ship cheese-making program on the farm.