--- Tips for Analyzing Strategic Plans ---

Financial evaluation is critical regardless of your goals and planning purpose. This information, along with the goals that you developed in Planning Task Three (Vision, Mission, Goals), will help you choose between whole farm strategies (if you are considering more than one). It will help you evaluate whether your new business strategy is an improvement over your present business approach in the long run.

In this section, you will evaluate the financial feasibility of each whole-farm strategy (or strategies) by preparing long-range and transition period performance projections. Specifically, you will work through a whole farm evaluation to look at projected profitability, liquidity, solvency and risk.

Once you’ve completed the financial evaluation, you may decide to further test and evaluate your strategy for environmental, market, community and quality of life or personal benefits. For instance, notebook and computer software programs, like Farm*A*Syst, are available to help you study the impact of your operations strategy on soil and water quality. Similarly, nonprofit organizations like the Land Stewardship Project can assist with field monitoring for conservation benefits, such as increased amphibian and bird populations. Other organizations like the Agricultural Utilization and Research Institute in Minnesota, can assist with the product development and market testing. These and other evaluation tools and organizations are listed in the “Resources” section. Be your own guide when deciding which additional business strategy components to evaluate.

Long-Term Outlook Market expansion, operational transitions, and human resources shifts likely will impact output and expenses, and consequently income levels, for more than one year. A long-term evaluation is therefore critical to help you decide whether or not to adopt a new marketing, operations, human resources, finance or whole farm strategy. 4 TASK 167 BUILDING A SUSTAINABLE BUSINESS The following guidelines will help you develop more accurate and realistic financial projections:

Use average production levels and prices that realistically can be expected over the long run. Don’t be overly optimistic or conservative. It seems that it is human nature to be one or the other. If you are overly optimistic, you may be fooling yourself into making a major mistake. But if you are overly conservative, you may steer yourself away from a real opportunity.

Estimate costs on a per unit basis first, then calculate totals. Estimate variable costs, those that will vary directly with your production levels, on a per acre or per unit of production basis. Then calculate totals for each alternative.

For overhead costs, start with the average expense levels from your past history for what you are doing now. Then adjust them as best you can for your alternative plans.

Include the annual ownership costs of capital investments, not the capital investments themselves. These costs are sometimes called the DIRTI costs (depreciation, interest, repairs, taxes and insurance).

Allocate home-produced feed properly. For home- produced feeds, estimate your total production in an average year and the total livestock requirements. If the balance is positive, include the balance in crop sales. If the balance is negative, include it in feed purchases.

Be consistent between alternatives. Try not to let your emotions or your desires favor one plan over the other. Your desires will obviously impact your final decisions, but first, get the facts so you can make an informed decision.

Realize that your plans will not be perfect. Don’t agonize over an individual income or expense item too long. But keep your assumptions, and how sure you are about them, in mind when you consider the results.

Figure 87.

Tips for Analyzing Strategic Plans