--- Defining Financial Performance ---

capital) and what has been earned and retained over time (retained earnings). The net worth on the market value side includes these earnings, but it also includes the accumulated changes in market values of all assets over time (market valuation equity).

Look at the Minars’ sample Worksheet 2.13: Balance Sheet for a real-life example of the difference between cost and market valuation. At the end of 2000, their net worth under cost valuation was $126,610, while it was $735,642 under market valuation (from Minars’ Worksheet 2.10:

Income Statement—not shown for privacy reasons).

Market valuation is important if your goals include looking for external funds. Yet you should consider adding cost information to your analysis for your own evaluation of financial progress. These concepts (and the following financial performance measurement concepts) are explained in greater detail in Evaluating Financial Performance and Position, available through the Oklahoma Cooperative Extension Service (see “Resources”).

Before going into the tools used in financial analysis, it may be useful to discuss the basic financial performance measurement areas of most businesses. The Farm Financial Standard’s Council (FFSC) has identified five financial measurement areas for farm businesses (Figure 22).4 They are no different than those sought by nonfarm businesses. However, some of these performance measurement areas have not been systematically analyzed in farming as in other businesses.

The five recommended financial performance measurement areas are: • Profitability • Liquidity • Solvency • Repayment Ability • Efficiency To get a complete look at the past financial perfor mance of your farm business, you should prepare the following statements to evaluate profitability, liquidity and Profitability: Profitability evaluates just what you would expect—whether your business is making money. This sounds pretty basic, but it is probably the most neglected part of the financial evaluation process by farmers. Traditionally, farmers have prepared their financial information for lenders instead of for their own purposes. How many times has your lender asked you for an accrual income statement? Even if you evaluate several years of tax schedules, you may be missing the mark on how profitable your business has been.

Liquidity: Your business is liquid if you have available funds or can easily access funds to meet ongoing or unforeseen cash requirements. You may have a very liquid farm business even though you do not have a lot of cash in the bank if you have assets that can be sold and turned into cash easily, without interrupting the flow of ongoing business.

Solvency: Your business is solvent if it has an adequate net worth to make your farm attractive to lenders and others who you might want to invest in your business. Lenders want to lend you money.

That is how they make their living. But they won’t be interested unless you have adequate assets relative to claims on the assets (debts). This makes lenders comfortable investing their assets in your farm business.

Repayment Ability: While liquidity evaluates the overall availability of liquid financial reserves, repay ment ability looks more at whether your business generates enough cash to repay debt on time. It is closely related to profitability in that a profitable farm will usually generate sufficient funds for debt repayment. But repayment ability is also related to debt structure. If you have too much short-term debt, with high repayment requirements, even a profitable business may experience repayment problems. This is often a problem for farms that are growing rapidly. They may be very profitable, but they often need to plow their earnings right back into the farm during periods when debt repayment requirements are at their highest.

Efficiency: Efficiency is very closely related to the issues discussed in the section on operations. It measures how much income is being produced, how much it costs to produce it, and where the money is going. So, efficiency is where you should look if you are interested in evaluating cost control. 2 TASK 54 BUILDING A SUSTAINABLE BUSINESS Figure 22.

Defining Financial Performance Measurement Areas 4 Financial Guidelines for Agricultural Producers, Recommendations of the Farm Financial Standards Council, 1995 (revised).