--- Page 267 ---

Values • Our most important value is health. Healthy people, healthy animals and a healthy environment make all endeavors possible. • Extol Christian values in our relationship with our family, customers and neighbors. • Strive for open, trusting communication with family, employees and customers. • Because our health is directly tied to the health of the environment, we strive to produce healthy dairy and meat products by utilizing sustainable methods in their production. • We value preserving our forests and grasslands for future generations to enjoy. • It is important to be a contributing member of the community both socially and economically; our community values the esthetic beauty of seeing farm animals on the land.

Mission Statement Cedar Summit Farm will provide clean, healthy, locally grown and safe meat and dairy products to our local community and within the 25-mile surrounding area. Our animals will be raised humanely in an environmentally sound manner. We will strive to educate consumers about the health benefits of grass-fed meat and milk products. We hope to be a model for other farmers that are looking for a way to be more profitable and sustainable.

Farm History My Grandfather purchased what is now Cedar Summit Farm in 1935. When my parents married in 1938, they moved onto the farm. I was born and raised there.

Florence and I met at the University of Minnesota where we were both students. I graduated in 1963 with a B.S. in Agricultural Economics & Dairy Science, and in 1964 we were married. I farmed with my father after service in the U.S. Army and in 1966 accepted a position with Minnesota Valley Breeders as an Artificial Insemination Technician. Our family grew fast—Lisa was born in 1965, Chris in 1966, and Mike in 1967.

In 1969 we made the decision to return to the farm full-time. Having been raised there, I knew what we were getting into. I was the only son and felt an obligation to return to what my Grandfather started.

We built a new sixty-cow tie stall barn in 1971. Over the years we developed a registered Holstein herd that has received state and national recognition. We showed our animals at many shows and fairs.

The farm was originally 120 acres. We purchased an additional 80 acres in 1972, and another 18 acres more recently. We lease an additional 65 acres that adjoin our property. We also own a 160-acre farm at McGrath, MN that consists of 90 acres of improved pasture for young stock.

Appendices 266 BUILDING A SUSTAINABLE BUSINESS