--- Organizational Structure: How will ---

Organizational Structure: How will we legally organize and structure our business?

The legal organization that you choose for your business will have risk, finance, tax and estate planning ramifications. Legal organization is typically one of the first decisions made when structuring a new business.60 As a current business owner you might consider re-evaluating your organization strategy here to determine if one of the alternatives provide legal or financial benefits. As a new or potential business owner who is at the beginning of the business life-cycle, however, you have a range of organizational strategy alternatives to consider.

Traditionally, most farm businesses have legally organized as sole proprietorships or partnerships. This is still a common legal structure, but a growing number of today’s farms are incorporating as Limited Liability Corporations (LLCs) or Cooperatives. These structures offer some financial protection, tax advantages, and other benefits. The Minars, for instance, considered three organizational alternatives: LLC, S-Corporation (a corporation in which the owner holds 100% of the shares), and Partnership. After researching each alternative and weighing the advantages and disadvantages of each, they decided to organize the processing business as an LLC.

This structure enables them to gradually pass shares and ownership of the business on to their children in advance of retirement. “We also hope that by making our children shareholders, they will have more of a long-term, vested interest in the business,” explains Florence Minar. 4 TASK 158 BUILDING A SUSTAINABLE BUSINESS Sole proprietorship. In a sole proprietorship, the business is owned and controlled by one person. This means that if a husband and wife or father and son plan to operate the business together, only one of them can hold legal title to the business. The primary advantage of sole proprietorship organization is that you are independent and free to make all business decisions without an obligation to partners or shareholders. The disadvantage of a sole proprietorship is that you are personally liable for any debt, taxes, or other financial and regulatory charges.

Partnership. Partnerships may be formed between two or more family members or third parties. Each partner is liable for all partnership obligations. One of the primary advantages of a part nership may be the infusion of business capital and other assets by one or more partners. Each partner pays taxes individually based on his or her share of income, capital gains and losses. There are two types of partnership: general partnerships and limited partnerships. In a general partnership, one or more partners are jointly responsible or liable for the debts of the partnership.

Corporation. Corporations are owned by one or more shareholders and are managed by elected directors. A corporation must be established in compliance with statutory requirements of the state of incorporation. In Minnesota, articles of incorporation and by-laws are legally required. The corporation, not its share holders, are responsible for corporate debts and other obligations.

One disadvantage of corporate organization is that its owners and family members are considered employees of the business and are therefore subject to labor laws and taxes.

Limited Liability Company (LLC). This organizational form offers owners limited liability like a corporation—investors are liable only for their investment in the business—but it may be classified as a partnership for tax purposes. Two or more business partners may form an LLC.

Land trust. A land trust is a legal entity that allows a land owner to transfer property to a trustee. While the trustee is the legal owner of the property, the beneficiaries are given possession and management of the land. This type of legal organization can be beneficial for estate planning purposes as it allows the beneficiaries to avoid probate upon death of the owner.

Cooperative. A cooperative is a legally incorporated business entity capitalized by its member patrons or owners. Dividends are paid out to its patrons. A cooperative is taxed on income at corporate rates, but patronage refunds are often tax-deductible to the cooperative. Many farmers are now using cooperative organization to acquire and provide machinery, livestock breeding and equipment maintenance, as well as marketing and advisory services.

Figure 78.

Legal Organization Options61, 62 60Planning the Financial/Organizational Structure of Farm and Agribusiness Firms: What Are the Options?, Boehlje and Lins, 1998 (revised). 61Ibid. 62A Guide to Starting a Business in Minnesota, Minnesota Small Business Assistance Office, updated annually.