--- worksheets for Task Five. ---

you discuss which business plan formats to use with your planning team, think again about how you ultimately intend to use the plan—for internal organizing or for communicating externally to a lender or potential shareholders.

If you will present your plan to others outside the business (lenders, potential clients or investors, family or other planning team members), it should convince them of the feasibility of your strategy. Therefore it should clearly convey ideas, supporting research, financial evaluation, and a contingency plan. Documentation will be critical. You will need to justify your strategy with information from your research, particularly if you intend to seek financing, solicit funds from outside investors, or to offer stock. When discussing your pricing strategy, for instance, justify why your prices are set higher, lower or even with competitive products. State under what circumstances you might change the pricing structure for each product and service to gain a stronger position in the marketplace.

On the other hand, if your plan is strictly for internal organizing, you may want to emphasize your goals, vision, mission and the overall operating plan.

A few of the most common business plan formats are shown here. Consider these with your planning team, and talk about which business plan formats seem most appropriate given your planning objectives. Use any one or a combination of these formats.

Figure 99 shows the Minar’s business plan outline. Notice that they have combined elements from the above sample outlines to create their own business plan format.

Specifically, they included three years’ worth of prior tax statements, FINAN financial analyses, and a projected income/cash flow statement for the proposed processing business in an Appendix. Without this information, the Minars would not have been able to pursue the use of external funds to finance their new building and processing equipment. 5 TASK 234 BUILDING A SUSTAINABLE BUSINESS Plan A: Holistic • Cover • Executive Summary • Table of Contents • Business Mission • Business Background (History and Current Situation) • Vision and Goals • Key Planning Assumptions • Marketing Strategy • Operations Strategy • Management and Human Resources Strategy • Financial Strategy • Projected Income Statement and Cash Flow • Appendices (relevant sup port information such as market research, resumes, brochures, let ters of recommendation, tax returns, etc.) See pages 245–247 for a complete set of blank worksheets for Task Five. ; To print a complete set of blank worksheets, go to http://purl.umn.edu/115840