--- back to the Minars’ Enterprise/Calendar Matrix, April through November are ---

local cooperative and their farm business management advisor in their human resources matrix. Though not employed directly by Cedar Summit Farm, both provide important expertise and advice.

A quick glance at this matrix indicates the degree of specialization and the extent of teamwork within the operation. Paul, Dave and Ryan specialize and work together in the dairy, pasture and hay enterprises. Dave and Florence work together in the meat marketing enterprises. Also, the fact that Dave is involved in all the enterprises means that he plays a key role in coordinating activities for the entire operation. Finally, note that this matrix can help identify enterprises that depend almost entirely on one person (a column with only one completed cell) and people who may be overloaded and spread too thin (almost every cell in a row has an entry).

Use Worksheet 2.8: Human Resources Matrix to sketch a clear picture of your current human resources. Also, look back to your completed Worksheet 2.7:

Enterprise/Calendar Matrix to describe the seasonal pattern of activities across all your enterprises. Are there critical times of the year when more work could be shared? Are some people in your operation over- or under-employed? Looking back to the Minars’ Enterprise/Calendar Matrix, April through November are busy months, as they are for most farm operations in the Upper Midwest. The Minars use a summer student worker to add labor during some of these peak months. Adding total labor hours from the enterprise/calendar matrix across all twelve months, the Minars estimate their total labor demand to be 3,873 hours.

Assuming a full-time worker contributes 2,000 hours of labor per year (forty hours per week for fifty weeks), this translates to just under two “full-time equivalent” workers.

Skills: What are our unique skills? What skills do we lack?

Worksheet 2.8: Human Resources Matrix describes the current pattern of decision and work responsibilities, but it is also important to assess how well suited each individual is to the roles he or she plays in the operation. Worksheet 2.9: Assessing Worker Abilities and Needs guides you through a simple evaluation of an individual’s abilities and needs. Fill out a copy of this Worksheet for each person in your operation. You may want to have some or all of your team members complete their own assessment form as a way of identifying untapped skills. You may not be aware of a particular talent or skill that someone on your team has developed. A completed Worksheet 2.9 for Ryan Jirik, the Minars’ part- time milker, follows as an illustration. Note that Ryan’s long-term goal is to own and operate his own dairy farm, and the Minars are considering hiring him as a full-time milker on Cedar Summit Farm when he graduates from high school.

As you review these Worksheets for people involved in your operation, ask whether there are people in your operation who have unique but untapped skills or critical skills that you are lacking. Also ask whether there are people who would be happier in other roles. These are opportunities or problems that can and 2 TASK 48 BUILDING A SUSTAINABLE BUSINESS .......