--- United States Department of Agriculture Natural Resources Conservation Service ---

You’ll use Worksheets 2.3 through 2.6 to record your answers as you work through this section. These Worksheets are designed for use in a farm business, but the fundamental questions are the same for any business and can be adapted for use by nonfarm rural businesses.

What physical resources are available for our farm business?

Physical resources include land, buildings and other structures, machinery and equipment, and breeding livestock and poultry. These are the tangible assets that you use to produce the products you market. Clearly the quantity and quality of the resources you control affect your current operations and influence your future opportunities.

In addition to listing your physical resources, it is also important to note institutional restrictions on their use, including long-term leases, easements, conservation agreements, and other arrangements that must be honored in future years.

A farm map can be a good tool to use to describe your land resources. For example, Frank Foltz used a map (Figure 8) to describe the existing layout of Northwind Nursery at the start of his business planning process.

Your map should be drawn approximately to scale showing the size and configuration of important physical features on your farm, including fields used for crop production, pastures, woodlands, lakes, ponds and streams. Contact your local United States Department of Agriculture Natural Resources Conservation Service (USDA-NRCS) agent (see “Resources”) for help in locating a good map of your land. The map should also show the location of man-made features, including the farmstead, permanent fence lines, the contours, grass waterways and irrigation wells. It may also be useful to show the location of crops currently on the farm, including perennial crops, such as alfalfa, vineyards and orchards. This provides a basis for planning the sequence of crops in rotation. Finally, if you rent land, draw a similar map for each rental tract. Then draw a smaller scale map that shows the location of your home farm and all the other parcels you farm. 2 TASK 39 BUILDING A SUSTAINABLE BUSINESS Figure 8.

Farm map: the Foltzes’ Northwind Nursery and Orchards