--- Product: What is our product? ---

Product: What is our product?

This is usually an easy question—but it’s sometimes useful to step back and think about what it is that you produce. What is a product? For example, Frank Foltz of Northwind Nursery and Orchard produces edible landscaping plants that are well-adapted to northern winters. Yet, he also provides knowledge and information in the form of “Northwind Notes” (Figure 7) and annual workshops to help educate his customers about fruit production and other homesteading skills. Is this service component of his business something that’s simply “bundled” with the plants he sells, or does it have the potential to be a separate product?

For each product you produce, fill out a copy of Worksheet 2.2: Current Market Assessment. As you ponder the question What is our product? you may identify products that have great potential. For practical purposes, products are defined as commodities, final consumer goods, and services.

Customers: What markets do we serve?

We often think of a market as a place, but it’s more useful to think of your markets in terms of the potential buyers for your products. Some examples will help illustrate this concept of a market: • Greg Reynolds of Riverbend Farm sells fresh, organically produced vegetables to restaurants, food cooperatives, and Community Supported Agriculture (CSA) customers in the Twin Cities metropolitan area. 2 TASK 32 BUILDING A SUSTAINABLE BUSINESS • Mary Doerr of Dancing Winds Farm sells goat cheese made on her farm to shoppers at the St. Paul Farmers’ Market. She also offers visitors to southeast Minnesota an opportunity to enjoy her farm and to learn about cheese making by staying in her bed and breakfast. • Dave and Florence Minar sold milk to their local cooperative and pasture- raised poultry, beef and pork to customers from the greater Twin Cities metropolitan area who visit Cedar Summit Farm.

Each of these short market descriptions indicates not only where products are sold—the geographic scope of the market—but also to whom they are sold. [Note that it is common to serve more than one market and that the customers in a market can often be segmented into several distinct groups.] Figure 7. “Northwind Notes—Apple Growing” from Northwind Nursery Catalogue