--- Planning Task Five: ---

Collaborative Marketing: A Roadmap and Resource
Guide for Farmers. Robert P. King and Gigi DiGiacomo.
Minnesota Institute for Sustainable Agriculture.
Cooperative Grocer online. A trade publication for over
300 cooperatives nationwide.
Developing and Implementing a Successful Marketing
Plan. Suzanne Karberg. Department of Agricultural
Economics, Purdue University. 1993. Publication number:
EC-674.
Direct Farm Marketing and Tourism Handbook.
Russell Tronstad and Julie Leones. University of Arizona,
Cooperative Extension Service. 1995.
Direct Marketing for Farmers and Ranchers. Video profile
of Oregon ranchers Jeanne and Dan Carver’s experience
marketing sheep fiber. Produced by SARE and Cooking Up
a Story.

Direct Marketing Food Specialty Products Online.
A curriculum covering strategies for online marketing.
University of Nebraska-Lincoln Extension.

Farmers’ Markets: Producers’ Characteristics and
Status of Their Businesses. Ramu Govindasamy, Marta
Zurbriggen, John Italia, Adesoji Adelaja, Peter Nitzsche, and
Richard VanVraken. New Jersey Agricultural Experiment
Station. University of New Jersey, Rutgers. 1998.
Publication number: P-02137-6-98.
Food Product Basic Label Requirements. Minnesota
Department of Agriculture Dairy & Food Inspection
Division. 1999.
Household Spending: Who Spends How Much on What.
The New Strategist Editors, 17th edition. 2013.
The Legal Guide for Direct Farm Marketing. Neil
Hamilton. Drake Agricultural Law Center, Drake University.
1999.
Local Harvest: A Multifarm CSA Handbook. Jill Perry and
Scott Franzblau. 2010 (revised).

Marketing. David L. Kurtz and Louise E. Boone. Dryden
Press. Chicago, IL. 1981.
Marketing Local Food. MISA.
The Marketing Plan: Step-by-Step. Michael O’Donnell.
1991.
Marketing Strategies for Farmers and Ranchers. USDA,
Sustainable Agriculture Research and Education (SARE).
2001.
Minnesota Directory of Organic Buyers. MISA. 2009.
The Minnesota Grown Directory. Minnesota Department
Rural Resource Management: Problem Solving for
the Long Term. Sandra E. Miller, Craig W. Shinn, and
William R. Bentley. 1994.
A Strategic Management Primer for Farmers. Kent
Olson. Department of Applied Economics, University of
Minnesota. 2001. Staff Paper number: P01-15.
Strategic Planning: A Conceptual for Small and
Midsize Farmer Cooperatives. James J. Wadsworth, Jim
J. Staiert, and Beverly Rotan. Agricultural Cooperative
Service, US Department of Agriculture. Research Report
number: 112. 1993.
Agencies, Organizations and Networks
National Ag Risk Education Library. A USDA initiative
offering information, tools, and assistance for risk
management planning.
Planning Task Five:
Implementation and Monitoring
Publications, Software, Videos and
Websites
Agricultural Business Planning Templates and
Resources. Holly Borne. ATTRA - National Sustainable
Agriculture Information Service. June 2004.
Holistic Management: A New Framework for Decision
Making. Allan Savory and Jody Butterfield. Island Press.
2nd edition. 1999.
The Monitoring Tool Box. Julia Ahlers Ness (editor).
Land Stewardship Project. 1998.
Functional Areas: Marketing
Publications, Software, Videos and
Websites
Adding Value to Farm Products: An Overview. By
Holly Born and Janet Bachman. ATTRA - National
Sustainable Agriculture Information Service. 1999.
Alternative Enterprises and Agritourism Tool Kit:
Farming for Sustainability and Profit. Resource
Economics and Social Sciences Division and Resource
Conservation and Community Development Division,
US Department of Agriculture. 2000 (updated February
2008).
CACI Market System Group Sourcebooks: The
Sourcebook of ZIP Code Demographics and The Sourcebook
of County Demographics. CACI. Updated annually with
consumer demographic information.
Resources
251
BUILDING A SUSTAINABLE BUSINESS