--- Transition Period Evaluation ---

to experience a financial shock and make adjustments to reduce their risk.

In the Minars’ case, the dairy processing alternative was financially superior to their base plan. But which plan is more uncertain? Most would probably agree that the un-established markets assumed in the dairy processing alternative make it more uncertain. So, that uncertainty was something they had to consider in their final decision about whether or not to pursue the milk processing strategy.

Use Worksheet 4.36: Risk Analysis to analyze the financial risk associated with each whole farm strategy that you are considering. If you develop best and worst case scenarios, vary whatever factor seems least controllable—input costs, output, market prices?

Likewise, if you choose to shock your original plan, adjust the recommended shocking rate (five percent) based on your own research. Organic producers, for example, have experienced dramatic and steady increases in organic market prices over the past five years as a result of fast growing demand. Conversely, as organic supplies begin to catch up with demand, organic growers could face an equally dramatic decline in prices. What do you think is a reasonable shock based on your own experience?

Transition Period Evaluation Almost any strategy that you consider will take time to implement and may involve some trade-offs. Sustainable Agriculture author John Mason (see “Resources) advises new and existing business owners to expect disruption, even some losses, when transitioning into a new business or management strategy. As you move along the learning curve, things may get worse before they get better. Low yields, high debt payments, unusually high family living Worksheet 4.36 Use the space below to record and compare the results of a five percent decrease in market prices, a five percent increase in expenses, or a two percent increase in interest rates for each whole-farm strategy alternative.You will need to use software or another sheet of paper to calculate the effect of these very real market uncertainties. How do these market and finance- related shocks affect your present business and its future under the whole-farm strategy alternatives that you are considering?

Risk Analysis Base Plan Strategy #1 Strategy #2 Effect of a 5% decrease in prices Net farm income Net cash flow Effect of a 5% increase in expenses Net farm income Net cash flow Effect of a 3% increase in interest rates Net farm income Net cash flow $40,848 $45,124 –7,303 –7,107 43,541 48,035 –5,499 –5,157 47,631 51,500 4 TASK 177 BUILDING A SUSTAINABLE BUSINESS Figure 93.

Example from Hog Finishing Operation— Worksheet 4.36:  Risk Analysis 69Financial Management in Agriculture, Financial Planning and Feasibility Analysis, 7th Ed., Barry, et al., 2002.

Figure 94.

What to Do if Your Strategy Isn’t Feasible in the Long Run 69 Financial management specialists recommend the following: • Change production plans • Change marketing plans • Reduce costs • Reduce consumption • Refinance • Institute alternative financing sources and methods • Consider leasing new capital items • Postpone expenditures • Introduce new equity capital • Seek off-farm income • Sell highly liquid financial assets and inventories • Downsize the scale of operations