--- Gigi DiGiacomo, Economic Consultant ---

Project Coordinators Gigi DiGiacomo, Economic Consultant Debra Elias Morse, Consultant Robert King, University of Minnesota Authors Gigi DiGiacomo, Economic Consultant Robert King, University of Minnesota Dale Nordquist, University of Minnesota Contributors Vern Eidman, University of Minnesota Debra Elias Morse, Consultant Susan McAllister, Marketing Consultant Kenneth Thomas, Professor Emeritus, University of Minnesota Farmer Business Plan Participants and Reviewers Nancy Aspelund Mabel Brelje Mary Doerr, Dancing Winds Farms Frank Foltz, Northwind Nursery and Orchards Dave and Florence Minar, Cedar Summit Farm Greg Reynolds, Riverbend Farm Technical Reviewer Damona Doye, Oklahoma State University Editor Beth Nelson, Minnesota Institute for Sustainable Agriculture Production Nancy Goodman, copy editor Andy Zieminski, cover design Jim Kiehne, layout Valerie Berton, SARE Outreach Front cover photos by (clockwise from upper right): Jerry DeWitt; Jerry DeWitt; courtesy Florence Minar; Neil Michel. Back cover photos by (from left to right): courtesy John Mayne; courtesy Karl Kupers; Jerry DeWitt; Jerry DeWitt; Mac Martin 2 BUILDING A SUSTAINABLE BUSINESS This publication was developed by the Minnesota Institute for Sustainable Agriculture in cooperation with the Center for Farm Financial Management, with funding from the Minnesota State Legislature.

This publication was co-published by the Sustainable Agriculture Research and Education (SARE) program, under a coopera- tive agreement with USDA’s National Institute of Food and Agriculture (NIFA).

To order copies of this book ($21.00 plus $7.95 shipping and handling), contact: (301) 779-1007, sarepubs@sare.org or visit the SARE WebStore at www.sare.org/WebStore; or contact (800) 909-6472, or misamail@umn.edu. This publication can be viewed online at www.misa.umn.edu or at www.sare.org/business.

Copyright © 2003, Minnesota Institute for Sustainable Agriculture Library of Congress Cataloging In Publication Data Building a sustainable business : a guide to developing a business plan for farms and rural businesses / by the Minnesota Institute for Sustainable Agriculture. p. cm. – (Sustainable Agriculture Network handbook series ; bk. 6) Includes bibliographical references.

ISBN 1-888626-07-0 (pbk.) 1. Farm management. I. Minnesota Institute for Sustainable Agriculture.

II. Sustainable Agriculture Network. III. Series.

S561.B84 2003 630’.68–dc21 2003005514 The SARE program provides information to everyone, without regard to race, religion, national origin, sex, age, disability, familial or veteran status. Every effort has been made to make this publication as complete and as accurate as possible.

It is only a guide, however, and should be used in conjunction with other infor- mation sources and in consultation with other financial and production experts.

The editors/authors and publisher disclaim any liability, loss or risk, personal or otherwise, which is incurred as a consequence, directly or indirectly, of the use and application of any of the contents of this publication. Mention, visual repre- sentation or inferred reference of a product, service, manufacturer or organization in this publication does not imply endorsement by the USDA, the SARE program, MISA or the authors. Exclusion does not imply a negative evaluation.