--- for Integrated Agricultural Systems indicated ---

If you choose to direct market, consider the options listed in Figure 43. Think about the investment required, marketing and labor costs, pricing options, grower liability, and barriers to entry.

Service providers also distribute directly to customers. In this case, it might be from an office, via fax, or on site at the customer’s home or business.

While direct sales can be a profitable strategy for the individual grower, they generally make up only a small portion of total sales and can be costly in terms of time. You often take on wholesaler responsibilities such as grading and packing when direct marketing. The majority of consumer goods reach grocery stores or restaurants through some type of intermediary. Intermediaries are businesses that help buy, sell, assemble, store, display and promote your products; they can help you move your product through the distribution channel.

Intermediaries include retailers, wholesalers, distributors, brokers and cooperatives. The advantages and disadvantages of distributing through well-known intermediaries are briefly described below.

If your distribution strategy includes sales to retailers or wholesalers, you will need to conduct substantial research. A recent study by the Center for Integrated Agricultural Systems indicated that Minnesota and Wisconsin retailers are very interested in purchasing and stocking local produce. However, they are often unwilling to do so because of inconsistent product quality. “Consistent quality means a predictable product for customers . . . When it comes to quality, many buyers want it all—produce that is shaped and sized consistently and of uniform ripeness and flavor; something they can get from California growers.”22 The study also identified six basic tips for approaching or selling to retail buyers, listed in Figure 45 on the following page.

Similarly, wholesale outlets can be difficult to access. Many of the same retail marketing principles apply to the wholesale market. You will need to 4 TASK 117 BUILDING A SUSTAINABLE BUSINESS Retailers Retailers, such as cooperative grocery stores, are an excellent way to reach customers. Retailers can provide some storage, logistical support, and advertising. In exchange, they will expect a larger share of your profit than a wholesaler or broker.

Retailers usually are able to dictate quality, packaging and delivery terms.

Wholesalers and Distributors Wholesalers either buy the products or take possession and act as commission merchants. They can be particularly helpful to businesses that are trying to introduce new products.

Wholesalers can use their leverage and expertise in the industry to push your product into a retail outlet. For all of its advantages, the wholesale market is large and typically difficult to access.

Brokers and Handlers Brokers are agents who represent farmers for a commission but do not take possession or title of your product. They often specify product quality, quantity and price terms in a written contract. If you produce a bulk commodity or plan to ship overseas, a broker is usually needed. The University of Illinois- Urbana Champaign offers a checklist to help you understand and evaluate specialty commodity contracts (see “Resources”).

Cooperatives Cooperatives and other collaborative marketing groups (CMGs) offer their members the opportunity to access otherwise unreachable markets, share risk, and the chance to negotiate favorable prices through increased bargaining power.

The Coulee Region Organic Produce Pool (CROPP), which markets under the Organic Valley label, as well as the National Farmers Organization, have been very successful at accessing markets and building profits for member-owners.21 There are a number of resources available at the national and state government levels to assist with the development of or to help with the decision to join a CMG (see “Resources”).

Figure 44.

Intermediary Options 21Collaborative Marketing: A Roadmap and Resource Guide for Farmers, King and DiGiacomo, 2000. 22New Markets for Producers: Selling to Retail Stores, Center for Integrated Agricultural Systems, 1999.