--- planning efforts. This Guide was originally targeted toward Upper Midwest ---

the farmers as well as examples from five of the review team’s business plans. We are grateful to them for their willingness to share their business planning efforts. This Guide was originally targeted toward Upper Midwest producers and entrepreneurs, hence the “Resources” section is weighted toward Midwest organizations. As the project evolved, we realized that the material is applicable to a variety of operations throughout the United States; the basic business planning process is universal. The Sustainable Agricultural Research and Education (SARE) Outreach agreed that this information should reach a national audience and graciously agreed to co-publish this material. This Guide benefited greatly from a careful review by Damona Doye, Extension Economist, Oklahoma State University, and we are grateful for her suggested revisions.

Parallel to the development of this Guidebook, a business planning software package was developed by the Center for Farm Financial Management at the University of Minnesota. This Guide and software are complementary.

Ultimately, this Guide is as much about the planning process as it is about the creation of a final business plan. MISA followed one of the farm reviewer families, Cedar Summit Farm owners Dave and Florence Minar and their family, throughout their planning process. The Minars’ planning experience—their initial exploration of values, brainstorming of goals, and research into on-farm milk processing, markets and financing—is incorporated throughout this Guide’s text and Worksheets. A completed business plan for the Minars’ Cedar Summit Creamery is attached in Appendix A. This enabled us to “put a face” on the business planning process, and we thank the Minars for their openness in sharing so much of their story. Armed with their business plan, the Minars were able to obtain financing. We are happy to report that as we go to press, Cedar Summit Creamery is up and running.

We hope this Business Planning Guide will assist today’s alternative and traditional business owners alike with the creation of a holistic business plan rooted firmly in personal, community, economic and environmental values. With a business plan in hand, today’s farmers and rural entrepreneurs will be able to take that first step toward the creation of a successful and sustainable business. 2010 Update. Prior to a 2010 reprinting of the Guide, we updated the Resources section. We also caught up with the Minars and provide an update on Cedar Summit Creamery on page 243. 5 BUILDING A SUSTAINABLE BUSINESS