--- expressed by Dancing Winds Farm Owner Mary Doerr. Alternatively, if you are ---

Author Ron Macher notes that goals come in all shapes and sizes. “There are personal goals, family goals, business goals, community goals and environmental goals. A family goal,” he explains, “might be to develop a system of farming that allows you to spend more time with your children. A personal goal might be to have enough farm income to quit your town job and farm full-time. A business goal might be to achieve a 20 percent return on your total investment.”8 Business goals can be broken down further into marketing, operations, human resources and finance objectives. As an existing business owner, for instance, you may have very specific goals for each functional area of the business—specific sales targets, workload limits, or profit objectives.

While these business goals will be unique to your business and personal values, one goal that is common to most business owners is some level of financial success. Although financial success may not be the most important goal of your farm business, it is usually in the mix. It is often very difficult to reach other personal, environmental, economic and community goals unless you reach a certain level of financial success.

Financial success can have many meanings. For one operator, it might mean making moderate financial progress or just breaking even while meeting other personal, business, and community goals. For someone else, it may not even be necessary to break even if there is another source of income to subsidize the farm.

For another, the financial goal may be to make enough money to retire at age 60.

There is no right or wrong—your goals should just reflect your personal values and be consistent with your own future vision.

As you sketch goals, think about your family’s desired standard of living.

Estimate your future family living expenses using your current expenses (Worksheet 2.11: Family Living Expenses) as a starting point. Then factor in any quality of life changes that you foresee in the next two to ten years, such as the need to pay for college tuition, home improvements, retirement or travel as expressed by Dancing Winds Farm Owner Mary Doerr. Alternatively, if you are happy with your current standard of living, one of your goals might be to maintain current spending levels during the start-up phase of a new business enterprise.

Be specific about how much income you will withdraw from the business annually to meet family or household living expenses. Will it supply all of your family living needs or only a portion? Worksheet 3.3: Estimating Our Family’s Goal for Profit will help you estimate your family’s future family living expenses and goals for financial success.

Regardless of what your goals are and how you choose to organize them, planning and goal setting can be made easier by defining a timeframe for each goal. The most common timeframes used for goals are a short-term horizon of one to five years, an intermediate horizon of five to ten years, and a long-term horizon of ten years or more. Look at the Minars’ goals (Worksheet 3.4, Figure 34) to get a feel for how these timeframes might be used. They combined personal 3 TASK 92 BUILDING A SUSTAINABLE BUSINESS 8 Making Your Small Farm Profitable, Your Goals and Farm Planning, Macher and Kerr Jr., 1999.