--- Financing the Farm Operation ---

Capital leases. A capital lease can be categorized as a property “rental agreement” when ownership rights are not transferred and as a “purchase” when the lease gains you ownership of an asset at a reduced purchase price at the end of the agreement. Capital lease purchase agreements can provide effective control and may reduce costs while building equity. Whether it reduces cost or risk in the long term will depend on the fine print of the agreement. It is always advisable to have a lawyer look over the details of any agreement that will have such a major impact on your financial future. For more information about how to calculate lease values and returns, see Capital Leases by Haefner and Doye in “Resources”.

Contributed capital. Most business owners have to invest some of their own equity in the business to get it up and running. This may be a basic requirement to getting your business started. Initial capital contributions may not be the end of your use of contributed capital to finance the business. Many farmers continue to inject money into the operation from off-farm income. This “subsidization” of the farm from off-farm sources is often looked at as a negative, and it can be if it is eaten up by farm losses. However, it can also be looked at as an alternative place to invest off-farm earnings. If your farm is profitable and your alternatives for financing replacement/ improvements are between debt capital and contributions from nonfarm sources, you may decide that capital contributions are a sound investment.

Debt. Debt financing (for land acquisition, intermediate, and operating loans) is the traditional source of external financing for most farm operations. As long as you are earning a higher return with borrowed funds than the interest rate, it is profitable to grow your business using someone else’s money. Commercial banks, insurance companies, Farm Credit Services, and the Farm Service Agency offer debt financing. Your long-range vision and goals probably say something about how much debt capital you are comfortable with. The major plus to using debt financing is control. When structured correctly, debt can be an effective way to eventually build equity as the debt is reduced. However, just because you are paying down debt, particularly intermediate term debt, you may not be increasing equity as assets may need to be replaced as fast as the debt is being paid off. Depreciation is a real cost. The more debt capital you use, the more your financial alternatives will be reduced.

Operating leases. Operating leases, such as traditional land rental arrangements, give you less control, and usually (but not always) come at a lower cost than ownership.

They can be flexible and reduce risk. Don’t be afraid to try to negotiate some flexibility into an operating lease arrangement. Sometimes, the owner may hold all the cards and will not see the need to take on any of the risk faced by the operator. In other situations, you may be able to pass on some of the risk in return for higher lease payments during high-income times. Also, don’t forget to cultivate personal relationships with your landlords.

Remember them at holiday times and provide them with information that shows you are doing a good job. Most successful operating leases rely on the fact that the owner is more comfortable with you managing his property than alternative renters, and therefore, is willing to give you a break in rental rates or terms.

Finance: How will we finance capital requirements?

The financial strategy you develop will depend on your choice of business organization and your values as they relate to risk, control, costs and maturity.

Historically, farm businesses have financed themselves internally through family equity—relying on debt only when internal equity was not adequate to finance growth of the business.63 Today, however, external financing through debt, leasing, and outside equity is common.

If you anticipate the need for financing to pay for start-up, annual operating, or long-term capital expenses, you have several options to consider. Some common internal and external financing alternatives are described in Figure 80. Additional information is available in Financing the Farm Operation by Kunkel and Larison (see “Resources”). Pay particular attention to real estate financing. Land and building 4 TASK 160 BUILDING A SUSTAINABLE BUSINESS Figure 80.

Finance Alternatives 63Planning the Financial/Organizational Structure of Farm and Agribusiness Firms:

What Are the Options?, Boehlje and Lins, 1998 (revised). .......