--- Prepare the History and ---

Prepare the History and
Current Situation Section
of Your Business Plan
The history and current situation section of your business plan
should draw on and summarize material from the Worksheets and
exercises associated with this Planning Task. The content and style of
this section will be influenced by the purpose of the planning process
and by the audience for your plan. A suggested outline could follow that
of this chapter as described below. If you decide not to include your
value statement in your business plan (Planning Task One), this will be
the first section of your business plan.
If your business plan is strictly for internal use, your description
of the current situation may emphasize documenting key events in the
history of your business. You can then assess how well your current
business matches up with your personal values and aspirations,
and make changes that address problems or take advantage of new
opportunities. Recounting your history can help you clarify the issues
that you face. It can also remind you, and others in your operation, of
the reasons for making changes.
If your business plan will be used primarily as a proposal to lenders
or outside investors, the current situation section of your business plan
may be quite different. You may choose to use a less personal, more
factual business history description in your actual business plan. This
might still include a discussion of values, but there is likely to be more
emphasis on providing quantitative information on operating efficiency,
past financial performance, and the strength of the current financial
position. In the Minars’ plan, for example, there is a narrative section
on history and current situation, but there are also major sections that
present detailed data on past performance and the current financial
position (see Appendix A).
Regardless of your purpose in developing a business plan and your
intended audience, keep in mind that it’s almost impossible to know
where you are going in the future if you don’t know where you are right
now. As Ken Thomas says in Developing a Longer-Range Strategic Farm
Business Plan, “Projecting the future without evaluating the past and
present business situation can be difficult and potentially hazardous to
the future of an individual farming career.” (See “Resources.”)
2
TASK
66
BUILDING A SUSTAINABLE BUSINESS
4Preparing the Current
Situation Section of Your
Business Plan

I. Values Statement (optional)

II. History and Current
Situation

A. Brief History of Your Farming
Operation

B. Assessing Your Current
Situation

i. Marketing

ii. Operations

iii. Human Resources

iv. Finances

C. Whole Farm SWOT Analysis