--- Moreover, the Appropriate Technology Transfer for Rural Areas (ATTRA) has ---

including production, marketing and promotion—as well as a return for your time and investment. You will have the opportunity to crunch these numbers later when you evaluate the strategy you are currently developing.

For now, begin developing a pricing strategy around prevailing market prices for similar products if they exist. Learn about what customers are willing to pay and what prices your competitors charge.

Begin your research by listing competitor prices for similar products—note any seasonal pricing changes, premiums and discounts offered by intermediaries (brokers, grain companies, processors, retail groceries, etc.). Check with your state Department of Agriculture, or your University Extension Service for a list of current market prices for traditional commodities, such as livestock and forages. Specialty commodity prices may be difficult to locate or only available for a fairly substantial fee. Markets for organics, non-GMOs, and other specialty commodities, such as lentils, are relatively immature and little information is available. Therefore, you will have to do a little digging when searching for historic, current, and projected market prices. In general, a good source for alternative product prices, including organics, is the Internet. Food cooperatives, like Blooming Prairie, list weekly wholesale prices for produce.

Retail prices for a range of processed dairy and grain products, fresh produce, flowers, herbs and spices often are available on individual company Web sites.

Moreover, the Appropriate Technology Transfer for Rural Areas (ATTRA) has compiled a listing of relatively low-cost organic market price and industry research called Resources for Organic Marketing (see “Resources”). If you have Internet access or are willing to make a few phone calls, your market price research needn’t take long.

Once you are familiar with prevailing market prices and your costs of production, you are ready to begin developing a pricing strategy. There are a variety of strategies to consider depending on your ability to set prices. Common pricing strategies for differentiated (value-added or specialty) commodities including consumer goods and services (with relatively high price setting ability) are discussed in Figure 48.

If you are a small or mid-sized producer selling in a local market, be careful not to place too much emphasis on price competition. You will likely have better results competing based on quality, value added and communications. Still, you need to think about how to price your commodity or product. 4 TASK 122 BUILDING A SUSTAINABLE BUSINESS Figure 47.

Blooming Prairie Wholesale Produce Pricing List .......