--- sales. Mike Minar and ---

the labor component of your whole farm business strategy.

According to their workforce strategy in Worksheet 4.17, the Minars could fill nearly all of their workforce needs through the creation of permanent jobs for several family members. Their daughter, Laura Ganske, would become the business’ new distribution manager.

She would coordinate and staff home deliveries and on-farm sales. Mike Minar and his wife, Merrisue, would also both join the business as permanent employees. Mike would become the processing plant manager. He would oversee production, testing, and packaging.

Merrisue would work part-time as the business’ office manager. She would handle bookkeeping and payroll. The Minars’ youngest child, Dan Minar, also will join the business full-time as a marketing manager once he has completed his university degree.

Dave, Florence, and their current partner, Paul Kajer, would be reassigned to new tasks. Dave and Florence would work full-time in the plant while Paul would take over Dave’s current work as livestock manager, performing all pasture and dairy production-related management tasks. This shift would create a new gap—the need for a full-time milker—that the Minars planed to fill with external hired labor.

Worksheet 4.19 Filling Workforce Needs Use the space below to flesh out new position titles and task descriptions for each new enterprise or existing enterprise that is short on labor. Next, if adding labor, describe the type of position that will be created—full-time or part-time, temporary or permanent, seasonal or year-round—as well as the skills desired for each position. Lastly, describe your strategy for addressing workforce gaps and acquiring and training labor. Workforce strategies may include: reassigning current labor; adding new labor (family, employees, volunteers, interns); hiring out work to custom operators or consultants; or developing work trade arrange- ments with neighbors or relatives.You might also consider reducing some of your labor needs through the use of additional equipment and machinery or through new business arrangements.

Position/Task Type of Position Skills/Experience Desired Acquisition Strategy (title) (full time/part time, temporary/permanent) CONTINUED Office Manager (bookkeeping, payroll, tax preparation) Marketing Manager (commu- nicate with customers, wholesale buyers, take orders, promote products) Distribution Manager (load, unload truck, deliver products) Processing Plant Manager (oversee processing, monitor quality, fine-tune processing schedule, haul milk to plant, back-up plant staff) Processing Plant Staff (operate equipment, test milk and products) Computer Technician (set up computers, software programs, maintenance, staff training) Farm manager (manage hay crop production, pastures, livestock production, monitor herd health, relief milker) One part-time, permanent One full-time, permanent position One full-time permanent position One full-time, permanent position Two full-time, permanent positions One part-time, permanent position One full-time, permanent position Accounting background; good with numbers; accurate Marketing experience; person- able; articulate; creative; excel- lent knowledge of products and grazing philosophy Driver’s license; personable; physically able to haul products Management experience; mechanical skills; good commu- nication skills Willingness to operate equip- ment; mechanical skills; friendly, cleanliness Software and hardware training and experience Knowledge of forages, pasture rotation; field work/equipment operating experience; comfort- able around animals; milking experience Fill internally with family labor: Merrisue Minar Fill internally with family labor: Dan Minar Fill internally with family labor: Laura Ganske Fill internally with family labor: Mike Minar Fill internally with family:

Reassign Dave and Florence Minar from current farm man- agement and marketing roles Fill internally with family labor: Eric Ganske Fill internally: Reassign cur- rent CSF partner, Paul Kajer, from milking staff position to management position 4 TASK 150 BUILDING A SUSTAINABLE BUSINESS Figure 73.

Example from Cedar Summit Farm—Worksheet 4.19:  Filling Workforce Needs (both sides)