--- Barriers to Effective ---

plan for the business.

Management. Farm business managers, like most independent small business owners, are responsible for a range of tasks that include planning, organization, decision-making and control of resources.50 They are responsible for the long-term development and success of the business—implementing the business plan, monitoring performance, and facilitating change.

Based on your skills assessment in Planning Task Two (Worksheet 2.9), think about your ability and desire to manage the farm business—to plan, organize, make decisions and communicate with your workforce. Taking on management responsibilities yourself is only one of several strategic options. You might consider other strategic alternatives such as: • Hiring out management. • Partnering with someone else to share management duties. • Transferring the management duties to someone else within the business.

Dave and Florence Minar planned to retain overall management responsibility for Cedar Summit Farm and their new business Cedar Summit Creamery. However, they planned to share specific marketing, operations, and finance-related management duties with their children and current business partner, Paul Kajer. This management strategy required constant communication and a clear understanding of the business’ objectives by all members of the Minar’s management team. Dave and Florence explained that they feel well prepared to manage as a team. They have been planning and visioning together with their children on a regular basis for more than ten years.

Communication. Regardless of whether you plan to manage as a team, with a partner, or on your own, effective communication will be important. As Ohio State University specialist Bernard Erven notes, “Although communication does not guarantee success of a farm business, its absence usually assures problems.

A communication problem may soon become a crisis or it may linger on for years.”51 See Figure 74 for tips on how to become an effective communicator— particularly if you plan to play any role in managing the business. Making It Work52, a one-hour video on family communication and conflict resolution for business planning is an excellent communication resource.

Use Worksheet 4.22: Management Strategy to identify your management strategy for the business. Think hard about your willingness to perform the duties of an effective communicator. Your management strategy • Muddled Messages—be clear when communicating ideas or details. • Stereotyping—don’t assume that you know how the other person feels. • Wrong channel—use appropriate forms of communication (written communication for transactions, work agreements, etc. versus verbal agreements). • Language—make sure that you speak the same “language,” that terminology is clear to those involved. • Lack of feedback—prompt detailed feedback by checking in regularly. • Poor listening skills—always be prepared to listen; tune out other thoughts. Search for the meaning in what is being said. • Interruptions—try to anticipate and limit interruptions or other distractions. • Physical distractions—make sure there are no physical distractions (noise, extreme temperatures) when communi cating. 4 TASK 153 BUILDING A SUSTAINABLE BUSINESS Figure 74.

Barriers to Effective Communication53 50Economic and Business Planning Principles in Farm Planning and Production, James and Eberle, 2000. 51Overcoming Barriers to Communication, Erven, 2001 (reviewed). 52Making It Work, Passing on the Farm Center, 1999. 53Overcoming Barriers to Communication, Erven, 2001 (reviewed).