--- International Fertiliser Society: The Carbon ---

The Circular Farm by Charlie Steer
A Nuffield Farming Scholarships Trust report generously sponsored by NFU Mutual Charitable Trust

| 14
fertiliser. In some cases, 7,000kg of CO2-e (carbon dioxide equivalent) are emitted in the production
of 1,000kg of ammonia nitrate fertiliser. (Source: International Fertiliser Society: The Carbon
Footprint of Fertiliser Production: Regional Reference Values)
There is huge scope for reductions in greenhouse gas emissions, as well as soil and water
improvement by adopting circular techniques for the processing and application of ‘bio fertilisers.’
In very simple terms the benefits are three-fold:
1. Collection, processing, and use of organic waste results in reduced methane emissions,
especially when used as feedstock for anaerobic digestion.
2. Reduced emissions from the production of fertiliser. Fertiliser production from the
Haber-Bosch process, which converts hydrogen and nitrogen to ammonia, relies on
natural gas and high temperature. Rock-derived fertilisers require mining and
processing. There is scope to decarbonise the production of ammonia using hydrogen,
but this is not presently an option.
3. Reduced emissions in application. Urea, the most widely used fertiliser globally, releases
carbon dioxide on application. Urea also releases nitrogen oxides (a greenhouse gas 210
time more potent than carbon dioxide) during the nitrification process in the soil.
In addition to the greenhouse gas (GHG) savings, the processing of bio fertilisers addresses the
issues of concentration of nutrient rich waste in certain areas. Creation of a bio fertiliser allows the
efficient re-distribution of nutrient from areas of surplus to areas of deficit.
CCm Technologies is a UK based clean tech company producing a climate positive fertiliser from
organic waste streams. Chief executive Pawel Kisielewski and chief technical officer Peter Hammond
explained how the process works.
1. Organic waste input: High dry matter homologous organic waste, over 25% dry matter, is
ideal feedstock for the process. Separated solids from slurry or digestate separation is a
good starting point.
2. Weighing and Blending: The organic waste material is weighed out and blended with
additional inputs depending on the customer specification. This could be a manufactured
input eg, DAP or another dry input.
3. Carbon dioxide capture: CCm Technologies rely on the incorporation of carbon dioxide into
the product, anhydrous ammonia is reacted with compressed carbon dioxide in a mixing
vessel creating a nitrogen rich carbonate paste. This is pumped into a further mixing vessel
where the organic waste stream and the carbonate paste are combined. Once mixed the
product is pelletized in a pellet mill, identical to that found in feed mills to create a carbon
neutral dry pelletised fertiliser.
When thinking of a fertiliser plant most people think big industry, e.g., Yara’s 135 ha site in the
Netherlands or the 50ha site at Ince on the Dee Estuary. CCm Technologies offer a different solution,
the plant design is a modular 10,000 ton per annum units that are not dissimilar to a grain drier in
appearance and operation. The picture below shows the prototype plant in Swindon.