--- Graduate Training Scheme and am now the Arable Manager for Grosvenor Farms Ltd, a mixed dairy ---

The Circular Farm by Charlie Steer
A Nuffield Farming Scholarships Trust report generously sponsored by NFU Mutual Charitable Trust

| 1
Forward
The foundation of the Circular Economy is the belief that there is no such thing as waste. This is
encompassed by the Three ‘R’s’ - Reduce, Reuse and Recycle. This concept is increasingly a vital part
of modern food production to help transform our systems to eliminate waste, better circulate
resources and regenerate the natural world.
Waste is something I have always strived to eliminate. At school, my
nickname was Stig after Clive Allen’s book ‘Stig of the Dump,’ after I
was caught pulling a lawn mower from a skip! I was brought up on an
organic family farm in East Cheshire, which my parents ran alongside
their professional careers. The farm was very much a family affair, and
this sparked in me a passion for agriculture, wildlife conservation and
sustainability. This is neatly contained in the Soil Association’s circular
logo.
Upon leaving school and working on farms whilst travelling through Australia and New Zealand, I
read for a degree in agriculture at The University of Reading. I joined Grosvenor in 2011 on a
Graduate Training Scheme and am now the Arable Manager for Grosvenor Farms Ltd, a mixed dairy
and arable farm on the Welsh border, south of Chester.
My interest in the Circular Farm has not
been a lightbulb moment but a process
of evolution. The construction of the
brand-new Lea Manor Dairy Unit at
Grosvenor Farms in 2014 included the
installation of a manure separation
system. It became apparent that the
‘waste’ from the dairy was a valuable
resource to the arable enterprise, by
providing nutrients for the growing of
forage to feed the livestock. The farming
team experimented with manure
application techniques and technology to make use of the growing quantity of fertiliser at our
disposal. This example of the integration between the livestock and arable enterprises has
developed into a key strength of Grosvenor Farms. I have been thus encouraged to undertake
research into how the farm can be improved to become more sustainable and become a leading
example of a modern Circular Farm.
The farming community are well placed to embrace the concepts of the Circular Economy. I hope
examples of ingenious and creative individuals and businesses that I have investigated with the
support of the Nuffield Scholarship will provide inspiration for farmers and land managers, allowing
them to grasp the business opportunities a circular economy creates. The adaption of the Circular
Farming approach on a wider scale could also improve national economic and environmental
sustainability with simultaneous regeneration of biodiversity on farmland.
Aerial photo of Lea Manor Farm, Grosvenor Farms 2020 (author’s
own)