--- In 2017 ColegSirGâr at Gelli Aur College in Carmarthenshire launched its ambitious project to reduce ---

The Circular Farm by Charlie Steer
A Nuffield Farming Scholarships Trust report generously sponsored by NFU Mutual Charitable Trust

| 12
Project Slyri
In 2017 ColegSirGâr at Gelli Aur College in Carmarthenshire launched its ambitious project to reduce
diffuse pollution from slurries starting at the college’s 600-cow dairy unit. At the core of the project
is water quality protection. In conjunction with Power & Water (UK-based water treatment
technology company) they have developed a farm-scale slurry treatment process to reduce the
storage volume of the slurry by 80% in turn increasing nutrient content and reducing volume to
spread.
Slurry from the college’s 600-cow, part grazed, part housed dairy is pumped into a conventional
slurry store. From here three treatment processes are used.
1. Solids Separation: Two separation systems were in place undergoing trials at the time of
visiting. The more successful, but power hungry, of the two is a decanter centrifuge system
removing 52% of the solids. Decanter centrifuges use centrifugal force (spinning around a
horizontal axis) to spin solids from liquids. Solid laden liquid is pumped down the centre of a
centrifuge ‘bowl’ a tube and spun to produce G-force. The spinning throws the solids away
from the liquid through an orifice, where a screw conveyor removes the solid material. This
solids removal at the front end of the system is critical to the flowing stages. Consistent dry
matter and total suspended solids are key to the reliability of the system. Changing dry
matters due to bedding, feed and rainfall onto yards were giving John Owen, Neil Nicholas,
and the team at Gelli Aur College the biggest headaches.
2. Flocculation and DAF: The next stage is flocculation of suspended solid material via
“Soneco,” a patented electrode-based system for flocculation designed by Power & Water.
This uses a consumable aluminium anode, creating positively charged aluminium ions that
electrostatically bond to suspended solids, these precipitates the solids out of the solution
and float to the surface where a series of paddle like flights on a driven chain skim the
floating particles into a disk stack separator, where the flocculated cake is stacked with the
solids from stage 1. The liquid passes to stage 3.
3. Disk Stack Centrifuge: A Disk stack centrifuge again uses centrifugal force over a large
surface area to spin solids out of liquids. The difference between a decanter and disk stack is
the latter spins about a vertical axis. G-force spins the solid particles, from 0.1 to 150
microns down the stacked separator conical disks. The particles spin to the edge of the
separator ‘bowl’ where they are continuously removed. Varying the speed of spinning disks
varies the level of separation. In common with all centrifuges, there is a large power
demand: a key requirement to make a fully closed loop, is generating enough power on farm
to run such equipment with a high-power demand.
4. Advanced oxidation process (AOP): Uses oxidation reactions to remove any pathogens
remaining in the slurry via hydroxyl free radicals. These are produced in another Soneco
rector and can reduce the chemical oxidation demand and total organic carbon of the water
down to levels suitable for discharge to the watercourse, or reuse on the farm.