--- John Gilliland, the Director of Sustainability at nutrition company Devenish. ---

The Circular Farm by Charlie Steer
A Nuffield Farming Scholarships Trust report generously sponsored by NFU Mutual Charitable Trust

| 19
farms and foodscapes around the world.” The outstanding examples are identified by ‘lighthouse
farms’ guiding the way to sustainable food systems by 2050.
Rogier Schulte, his team and students have identified that: complexity + knowledge = food +
ecosystem services. The lighthouse farms are examples of this equation, demonstrating the
possibilities for others to follow. The lighthouses have several distinct categories in recognition of
different political, economic, social, technological, legal, and environmental factors globally. All the
categories represent innovative and financially viable solutions in the categories of smart agriculture,
regenerative, climate smart, permaculture, nature inclusive circular farming. The farming lighthouse
network uses the expertise of Wageningen to develop tools that enable the gap between ‘thinking’
and ‘doing’ to be bridged.
The circular farming lighthouse farm provides an insight into what is possible with the addition of
knowledge and complexity. One lighthouse farm is run by the Maj family in Belvadia, Latvia. The
farm ignores the concept of ‘by’ and main products, the family milk 1,000 cows on 4000ha. Milk is
the offshoot of manure production, the manure enters the farms AD plant, producing enough
electricity for 2,000 homes, the offshoot of the electricity is heat. The heat is used to warm water in
which sturgeon and eels are raised. In two years, the sturgeon grows to 10kg, the fish are processed
and sold. The fish is not the end of the story, as the caviar from the mature sturgeon is the final
product from the farm. The farm has carefully examined its flows and mass balances of biomass and
energy and created a model that makes every asset, be it land, stock, the anaerobic digester, or the
fish farm work to best use all the mass and energy from each interlinked enterprise to maximise the
flow of money.

Graphic: Wageningen University

The second of the lighthouse farms is the Dowth Estate in Newry, Ireland. The estate is overseen by
John Gilliland, the Director of Sustainability at nutrition company Devenish.