--- Russ Davis’s company Orgainx ( ---

The Circular Farm by Charlie Steer
A Nuffield Farming Scholarships Trust report generously sponsored by NFU Mutual Charitable Trust

| 11
environmental cost of trucking and further irrigation water abstraction. The reduction in waste goes
further as BioFiltro have ambitions to make their system from concrete Lego blocks so they can be
readily expanded or reused.
The benefits to Austin’s dairy are numerous. Firstly, the costly transportation of the manures to
outlying blocks of land has stopped. Secondly there is a huge reduction in the volume of abstracted
water, with the added benefit that the treated water, although not clean enough to discharge, has
no smell, and increased beneficial microbial activity. This stimulates soil life during irrigation. Thirdly
the worm castings generate revenue, once removed from the BIDA, it is retailed to a third party:
Russ Davis’s company Orgainx (www.organix.us) is a composting operation which, after screening
the casings, distributes the product under the brand “Kasting King”. Russ is also distributing the
liquid as “VerMedix” marketed as “a soil amendment to rebuild and enhance low and moderate
producing soils. Containing billions of beneficial microbes per bottle.” Austin and Russ are
investigating markets for the surplus worms from the system. Finally, and by no means, least the
methane reduction from the system is applicable in the US for a
carbon crediting scheme, worth 88USD/cow to a system on the
scale of Royal Dairy size. The eight ton per cow carbon dioxide
equivalent credits are calculated as the BIDA is treating the
manure removing methane emissions from the standard practise
of lagoon storage.
Austin and his family have a high profile in US dairy and he has
quickly become the face of sustainable, high output dairying,
partly due to the manure treatment through the BioFiltro
system.
Austin describes the benefits of vermicompost by simply saying “whatever comes out the back of a
worm is perfect for plants.” Regenerative farming guru Graeme Sait on his Nutrition Farming course
extols the virtues of supporting earthworms in any farming system. Graeme states the worms’ guts
not only contain unique organisms, but the castings they produce contain seven times more
phosphorus, ten times more potassium, five time more nitrogen, three times more magnesium and
one and a half times more calcium than the surrounding soil. The calculation follows on from the
rule of thumb that if a shovelful of soil contains twenty-five earthworms, they would be producing a
staggering three hundred tons of castings per hectare.
BioFiltro impressed me with its simple design, use of readily available materials and Matias’s
enthusiasm for worm power. BioFiltro has systems running from the Antarctic to the deserts of
Chile, treating waste from abattoirs, vineyards and even a chain of roadside service stations. The
principals of the circular economy are adopted and align with the three principals of the circular
economy. The BIDA is made of recycled materials and using the ‘Lego block’ system Matias
mentioned would mean a fully reusable design. Furthermore, it uses waste from fire break clearance
or low-grade woodchip as the substrate for the worms. The system keeps products, namely water
and nutrients in use and adds value through retailing these (although this might be exporting
valuable nutrients from the farming system). BioFiltro use the words “a wastewater solution
regenerative by nature restorative by design” in its marketing material a perfect fit with the third
principal of regenerating natural systems.
The author, Austin Allred (Royal Dairy)
and Matias Sjogren (Biofiltro)