--- Acidobacteria, Spirochaetes, and Deinococcus-Thermus ---

testing methods not listed here are described in the
Supplementary methods.

Results
Harvest survey
The experiment in which the soil was fertilized with
thermophile-fermented compost was planned as shown
in Fig. 1a. The amendment with compost tended to
increase the weight of the stems, leaves, and roots of
carrots. This tendency showed marked increases
dependent on the duration of the exposure to the
compost (Figs. 1b and 1c). A significant difference was
observed in February (Fig. 1c). Interestingly, the carrots
fertilized with compost tended to turn red. Therefore, an
analysis was performed using the RGB color matrix as
an index according to the procedure shown in Fig. 1d.
The study of the color matrix of randomly sampled
carrots showed that the rate of red coloration was
significantly
increased
by
compost
amendment
(p=0.012) (Fig. 1e). Because carotenoids generally
cause the red color of carrots, the carotenoid
concentrations were examined. The results confirmed
that the concentrations of α-carotene (p=0.0103 vs.
control), beta-carotene (p=0.1188 vs. control), and
lycopene (p=0.0146 vs. control) tended to increase (Fig.
S2). Furthermore, a taste survey indicated apparent
differences in flavor richness and immaturity. These
differences were confirmed in the carrots harvested in
February (Fig. 1f) and those harvested in November,
which showed a slight effect on growth (Fig. 1b). These
observations confirmed that the compost amendment
improved the indices of carrot production and quality in
this study.

Metabolome analyses of carrot leaves and roots
The application of thermophile-fermented compost
increased the content of 2,2-diphenyl-1-picrylhydrazyl
(DPPH) content by 40% (p=0.2612) in the roots. At the
same time, it decreased the DPPH content by 40% in
the leaves (p=0.0014) (Fig. 2a). On the basis of these
evaluations, metabolome analyses of carrot leaves and
roots were performed. Additionally, correlation analysis
was performed on the basis of the whole analyzed data.
As a result, the correlations of amino acids, flavonoids,
and phenylpropanoids were different between the
control and compost groups (Fig. S3).
In detail, the levels of metabolic compound candidates
changed as follows: the levels of 4-amino-butyric acid
(GABA), as amino acid-related metabolites, increased
significantly in the leaf after the compost exposure
(p=0.0072), but methionine sulfoxide and methionine
levels were decreased considerably (p=0.0007). The
levels of the metabolites annotated as kaempferol-Gal-
Rha,
cyanidin
3-O-Rut,
apigenin
7-O-
neohespseridoside, and quercetin-Glc as flavonoids in
the leaf were significantly decreased by exposure
(p=0.0023;
p=0.0031;
p=0.0035;
and
p=0.0147,
respectively) (Fig. 2b). For other categories, indole 3-
carboxyaldehyde increased considerably by exposure
(p=0.009)
,
but
L-2-aminoadipate,
malate,
1,3-
dimethylurate,
methylmalonate,
and
phenyllactate
decreased (p=0.0079; p=0.0106; p=0.0230; p=0.0410;
and p=0.0461, respectively). In roots (Fig. 2c),
tryptophan,
phenylalanine,
tyrosine,
and
L-2-
aminoadipate levels, as amino acids and nitrogen
metabolites, were significantly reduced by the exposure
(p=0.0177;
p=0.0952;
p=0.0449;
and
p=0.0355,
respectively), and arginine levels were significantly
increased (p=0.0315). The correlation between these
individual metabolites was also clearly different (Fig. S4).
Thus, such an increase or decrease in common
metabolites was not necessarily confirmed. However, at
least the compost amendments significantly changed leaf
and root metabolites, especially leaf flavonoids involved
in antioxidant activity. It has become possible to classify
characteristic metabolites in carrot leaves and roots
depending on the cultivation conditions.

Soil omics analysis
To evaluate the relationships among leaves, roots, and
soils, soil omics analyses were also performed. Due to
the difference in the target and analysis conditions, the
metabolome analysis was performed using a device
different from the one used for the leaf and root. Of the
amino acids and related compounds, S-methyl-L-
cysteine had an increased tendency in the composting
group, and the levels of nicotinamide tended to decrease
(Fig. 2d).
Subsequent analysis of the soil bacterial population
suggested that the bacterial diversity differed between
conditions with and without the application of compost
(Fig. S5a and Fig.3a). There was little change in α-
diversity (Fig. S5a). However, the beta diversity tended
to change, although not significantly (Fig. 3a). Some
changes in the bacterial populations were observed that
were not always significant differences (Figs. 3b and
S6a). Evaluation at the phylum level showed that the
phylum Proteobacteria as a dominant bacterial group
decreased significantly after the compost amendment.
The
levels
of
the
phyla
Gemmatimonadetes,
Verrucomicrobia,
Firmicutes,
Elusimicrobia,
and
Thaumarchaeota tended to be high (Figs. 3b and S6a).
On
the
contrary,
the
phyla
Planctomycetes,
Acidobacteria, Spirochaetes, and Deinococcus-Thermus
tended to decrease. At the genus level (Figs. 3c and S6b),
the abundance of the genus Marmoricola increased
significantly. Furthermore, the genera Paenibacillus,
Geobacillus,
Panacagrimonas,
Nocardiodes,
and
Phycicoccus tended to increase.
Therefore, these observations suggested that the
amendment of the compost caused changes in the
bacterial populations of the soil and altered the
metabolism of the soil.

Association analyses and covariance structure
analyses
An association analysis was performed based on
production indices, color matrix, and omics data, and
factors strongly related to compost administration were
selected (Fig. S7). The characteristics of leaf, root, and
soil bacteria were also visualized, and the differences in