--- How the Green Revolution became unsustainable ---

BG-12.4 Sustainable Agriculture Looking back we can now see that the Green Revolution was not as economically sustainable as once believed. While the system was able to realize a substantial increase in terms of yield per acre, it required larger amounts of purchased inputs such as nitrogen fertilizer and fossil fuels. The gains in yield were made by converting natural resources (like fossil fuels) into fertilizers to produce food.

This in turn influenced the social sustainability of the Green Revolution. Because farmers had to purchase more inputs (mainly during the early crop planting and establishment phase), their risk grew. Higher spring costs often meant that margins for profit were smaller during good years, and in years of crop failure the loss was much larger than before.

Finally, the environmental sustainability of farming was affected by the Green Revolution. The reliance on nitrogen fertilizer increased the amount of fossil fuels used to create edible food, and this altered the energy-use ratio negatively. The preference for mono-cropping in this system has also reduced on-farm biodiversity.

In conclusion, sustainability was not a driving concern at the time of the Green Revolution; instead, the goal was simply to increase agricultural production. From this example, we can see that increases in agricultural productivity often come at the expense of the people involved with production and the natural ecosystem. (This is an example of achieving food security at the expense of agricultural sustainability.) How the Green Revolution became unsustainable Future increases in yield are not sustainable if they cause any of the following negative impacts: ■ ■Degradation of natural resources ■ ■Loss of biodiversity ■ ■Spread of pests and diseases across natural and political borders that can affect agricultural production It is important that future innovations consider the three pillars of sustainability, rather than just focus on increasing agricultural production levels.

Today, we can see that agriculture has come up against some hard limits, like a finite land base for agricultural production (agricultural land in both the new and old worlds has been maximized).

This means that previous ways to increase global food production (like cultivating new/additional acres of land) are no longer available as choices: we need to find new ways to produce food that respect these hard limits.

The large global population is extremely dependent on modern agriculture to meet its food needs, and the ways in which those needs are met will be vital to the long-term health and success of our global population. Agriculture can help to both mitigate and adapt to climate change, but it is also a contributor to climate change.

The sustainability of global agricultural production has changed. The gradual intensification of agricultural production to meet the food needs of a growing population has decreased agriculture’s sustainability over time. Perhaps working with producers to adopt the first of many small steps towards improving the sustainability of agricultural production will help to reverse this trend.