--- Page 4 ---

ii

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
The project aims to demonstrate to farmers and land managers how the principles of the Circular
Economy can be adapted to create the Circular Farm. The business and environmental benefits of
this approach can help reduce input costs, provide a plentiful supply of energy, improve the soil
producing healthy nutritious food whilst protecting and enhancing biodiversity.
The foundation of the Circular Economy is the belief that there is no such thing as waste – this is
represented by the Three ‘R’s’ of Reduce, Reuse and Recycle. This concept could become a vital part
of modern food production helping to transform our systems of farming and food production to
eliminate waste, better circulate resources and regenerate the natural world.
Fundamentally the soil is the centre of this transition to circular farming. A functioning and well
managed soil allow efficient production of healthier, nutrient-dense food. Focus on the building of
humus brings with it the retention of water, increased nutrient holding capacity, whilst sequestering
carbon. Humus building dovetails into the use of bulky organic residual products forming further
closed loops systems from bio-solids to vermicompost.
Examples of innovative agricultural, biological, and engineering projects in Canada, the USA, Ireland,
and Holland are described in detail demonstrating methods of circular farming and the systems
supporting circular food production with the objective of inspiring the wider acquisition of
knowledge in this area and adoption of these and similar technologies and techniques on UK farms
and elsewhere.
The project encourages farmers to adopt a designed systems approach. This involves thinking
circular, rather than linear, to embrace complexity and diversity, as well as being alert to
opportunities, to collaborate with fellow farmers and build relationships with business involved in
food and energy production. Knowledge exchange is an important part of building success for these
multifaceted interconnected systems.
The project also calls on policy makers to emulate the Dutch policy of adopting a zero-waste strategy
in conjunction with climate change adaption and mitigation. One way of achieving this is to support
the farming community in a holistic way to adopt Circular Farming through financial support and the
removal of barriers to innovative solutions. The strategy must be aligned with producing safe,
healthy nutritious food to feed an increasing global population and not by regulating activities to
reduce production quantities.
Finally, the report makes the connection between the development of circular farming systems and
profitable, strong and sustainable business with low risk, diverse income streams.