--- Ostara Nutrient Recovery ---

The Circular Farm by Charlie Steer
A Nuffield Farming Scholarships Trust report generously sponsored by NFU Mutual Charitable Trust

| 8
“Right time, right place, right amount”
Ostara Nutrient Recovery
Another company in Canada pioneering the concept of a circular system is Ostara Nutrient Recovery
Technologies, which was born out of innovation first researched at the University of British
Colombia. The technology is now in fifteen sewage works in Canada, the US and Europe. The system
fits into the effluent out-flow of sewage works, where chemical flocculants would have been
applied, to remove phosphorus and convert it into a saleable, slow-release fertiliser.
The background on global phosphorus puts Ostara’s process into context. Phosphorus and nitrogen
are essential for human life as some of the elements crucial for the structure of DNA. Use of
phosphorus and nitrogen is one of the planetary boundaries that is currently being overshot,
massively. The well-publicised hypoxic ‘dead zones’ in the Gulf of Mexico are partly due to
phosphate leaving agriculture, industry and water treatment in suspension and dissolved in water
washing out of the Mississippi river. The phosphate in the water, along with other nutrients, causes
eutrophication creating a perfect environment for single celled organisms to thrive. These organisms
rapidly multiply and consume the oxygen in the water required for other organisms. Aquatic life
then dies and their decay results in more nutrients, feeding more algae and bacteria and a vicious
cycle starts to affect vast areas of coastline habitat where countless aquatic species had once
thrived. The ecological damage caused by these dead zones is only part of the problem as humans
are also able to transport phosphorus across the planet, concentrating it in areas of higher
agricultural productivity, where it is then either lost from the food system through production or,
after passing through humans or animals, into water. Phosphorus from readily available sources is
expected to reach its peak by 2030, thereafter extraction will become drastically more expensive.
Ostara have identified the market in global phosphorus and, by capturing it at areas of incredibly
high loading at sewage works, are capitalising on the opportunity.
The technology is a ‘fluid bed crystallisation reactor.’ This is a vessel where the growth of struvite
(magnesium ammonium phosphate) is promoted. To do this magnesium is added to the incoming
waste stream in an environment that encourages the rapid crystallisation of struvite. The crystals
grow and sink down through the vessel where they are extracted and dried into a fertiliser called
Crystal Green.
Crystal Green contains 5% nitrogen, 28% phosphorus, 0% Potassium and 10% magnesium. This
formulation is unique as it is insoluble under normal conditions, unlike most rock phosphate sourced
fertilisers. The sustainability credentials of the product continue to impress when this is considered.
Instead of leaching, Crystal Green is acid soluble, the fertiliser responds to root exudates of weak
acids such as citric acid. This dissolves the fertiliser and allows plant uptake. This response to plant
growth is in balance with the requirements of the plant. As growth stops at harvest for example,
root exudates stop and so does the phosphate release from Crystal Green. The slow and plant
promoted release of the phosphate is not only better matched to crop requirement, but leaching is
exceptionally low. Ostara are not only capturing phosphate but preventing losses from the food
system and perfectly demonstrating a win-win by whole heartedly embracing the concepts of the
circular economy.