--- A Nuffield Farming Scholarships Trust report generously sponsored by NFU Mutual Charitable Trust ---

The Circular Farm by Charlie Steer
A Nuffield Farming Scholarships Trust report generously sponsored by NFU Mutual Charitable Trust

| 5
regulation and organic farming approval in Canada and Buck Ross, farmer and owner, described how
demand was out-stripping supply for the digestate. Bio-EnPower had completed various crop trials
on their farm with some impressive results.
During a fascinating tour of the impressive site, Buck explained how he had installed the most
expensive toilet in Canada, a staggering $160,000. Due to ‘red tape’ the lavatory on site could not be
fed into the digester, into which tens of thousands of tonnes of organic waste were processed.
Instead they had to install a separate septic system, which baffled Buck, with the AD being located
just yards away! This raised an interesting discussion on regulation hampering the progress of the
bioeconomy. If there is to be transition towards the development of renewable energy from organic
waste there must be a regulatory environment that allows innovation and safety without the
millstone of bureaucratic rules, and the additional capital that must be employed to comply with
excessive red tape making some projects financially unviable.
Buck’s digester is not in isolation and anaerobic digestion the world over is proving an essential
player in the circular economy. In the UK, AD offers farmers, waste processers, councils, and a
combination of all parties the opportunity to unlock green energy in forms already usable by existing
technology. For example, bio-methane powered transport has been recently adopted by fleet
operators in the UK including Home Bargains and Amazon. The scope for AD now includes green gas
injected into gas grids, supported by the green gas support scheme which has succeeded the
renewable heat incentive (RHI). Currently there is no UK government subsidy for co-generated
electricity and heat energy via a combined heat and power system (CHP) - but in certain situations
and with power prices and demand increasing, AD’s running CHP may be viable without subsidy. In
addition to energy, digestate in its raw form has benefits as a bio-fertiliser and opportunities for
further processing, covered later in the report, could be a game changer.
AD is of particular interest as it has symbiosis with not only organic waste from the human
population but also with efficient intensive animal production systems where manures as feedstock
can be captured consistently.
Enterra
Food waste can provide the feedstock for another interesting addition to the bioeconomy - insect
agriculture, aka fly farming.
Enterra began in 2007 with the aim of solving two global problems: the need for finding new,
sustainable sources of protein for animal feed and addressing the high prevalence of food waste.
The Enterra team’s solution to these problems came in the form of a beneficial, non-invasive insect
species called the Black Soldier Fly (BSF) and by developing techniques to replicate the natural BSF
lifecycle. Unlike AD, where the feedstock was both pre- and post-consumer, Enterra use only pre-
consumer waste food to feed the fly larvae. This recycled food is collected from local farms, grocery
stores and food production facilities and contains a mix of fruits, vegetables, and grains.
The BSF larvae grow rapidly under controlled conditions, efficiently converting the nutrients in the
recycled food into protein and fat. The larvae are then dried and processed into three products:
•
EnterraGrubsTM – a feed supplement for poultry, wild birds, and other insectivorous animals.