--- (manure) of the Black Soldier Fly larvae. ---

The Circular Farm by Charlie Steer
A Nuffield Farming Scholarships Trust report generously sponsored by NFU Mutual Charitable Trust

| 6
•
EnterraProteinTM– made from de-fatted larvae. This it is an excellent source of digestible
protein and can be easily blended into commercial feed pellets for fish, poultry and pets.
•
EnterraOilTM – the fat component extracted from the larvae can also be blended into feed
pellets or used as a pellet coating for enhanced flavouring.
The manure from the larvae is also collected and EnterraFrassTM is a fertiliser made from the “frass”
(manure) of the Black Soldier Fly larvae.
To convert food waste into the products listed above, Enterra’s flies consume 130 tonnes of
Alberta’s food waste each day. This is de-packaged, if required, then blended into a smoothie which
is fed into a vertical farming system on just four acres in an industrial area on the outskirts of the
city.
Buck’s AD and Enterra both provide a solution that adds value to waste streams otherwise destined
for landfill. The interesting part of the operations is that co-locating the fly farm, which requires
energy as an input, with AD could provide a neat, and very circular set of food waste processing
options. Food can be sorted into pre- and post-consumer: pre-consumer destined for the fly farm
operation, post-consumer to the AD processor. Energy from the AD, both electrical and heat can be
diverted into the fly farming operation, the cycle can be added to, and the value-added increased.
Lystek
Lystek’s slogan is the first thing that grabs your attention:
‘Nothing wasted. Everything to gain’ summed up not
only their business but the principals of the circular
economy. The Lystek facility at Dundalk in Ontario takes
in sewage and, in a single vessel, a process of
maceration, low temperature hydrolysis and alkaline
injection remove all the pathogens allowing a fertiliser
product “LysteGro” to be produced and marketed to
farmers in the vicinity. The process itself is unique and
can fit into systems using AD as well as more
conventional sewage treatment facilities. Adding the Lystek THP (thermal hydrolysis process) into an
AD system not only pasteurises but also breaks up long chain hydrocarbons presenting more
available carbon into the AD process for digestion into methane.
Lystek provides a service to farmers and conducts field trials to evaluate LysteGro (liquid fertiliser)
and promote its benefits. The company has an impressive fleet of equipment to distribute and
accurately apply LysteGro and provides spreading via contractors or ‘custom’ operators as part of
the service. The tanker set up which Sam Halloran, Product Manager with Lystek, took me to see
makes most UK kit look like toy tractors. The operation was very slick to keep farmers supplied, and
allowed timely application for agronomic and environmental benefits.