--- Allred’s Royal Dairy in Washington. Prior ---

The Circular Farm by Charlie Steer
A Nuffield Farming Scholarships Trust report generously sponsored by NFU Mutual Charitable Trust

| 10
BioFiltro
BioFiltro is a wastewater treatment
company who have applied their worm
powered process in full scale at Austin
Allred’s Royal Dairy in Washington. Prior
issues, some of them resulting in costly
legal fees, meant that pumping slurry into
the irrigation systems was no longer an
option. Trucking slurry to off-lying land
also had become environmentally and financially unsustainable. Alongside Austin, the team at
BioFiltro have addressed this challenge by installing a six-acre worm bed. This uses large shallow
tanks, recycled plastic pallets, a layer of river cobbles then a couple of feet of low-quality wood chip
which is a by-product of clearing fire breaks. The chip is then inoculated with worms, microbes and
specific bacteria and fitted with surface irrigation system.
Austin’s dairy uses a flood or ‘flume’ wash system to clean passageways. The flume wash water like
LWR, goes through a roller press separator to remove the course fibre. The solids again go to a
composting process or are land spread. The liquid is pumped over the worm bed, telematic systems
carefully monitor the performance, inflows, and outflows of the worm bed or ‘BIDA’ (Biodynamic
Aerobic) system.

Liquid from the flume wash being pumped onto the Biofiltro BIDA at Royal Dairy.
The magic starts when the worms, bacteria and the woodchip combine to capture 90% of the
incoming phosphorus, nitrogen, and suspended solids. Worm castings are then harvested from the
system as a valuable vermicompost once every 12-18 months, after which the remaining woodchip
and worms are screened out and returned with the addition of fresh woodchip to the BIDA. The
treated water coming from the system can then be pumped back to be used for flume washing the
passageways again and, when in surplus, through irrigation pivots saving the financial and