--- The farmland includes 20% of the UNESCO World Heritage Site at Brú Na Bóinne in a 6,000-year-old ---

The Circular Farm by Charlie Steer
A Nuffield Farming Scholarships Trust report generously sponsored by NFU Mutual Charitable Trust

| 20
The farmland includes 20% of the UNESCO World Heritage Site at Brú Na Bóinne in a 6,000-year-old
landscape including Megalithic passage tombs. John and the team took on a blank canvas in farming
terms when Dowth was purchased by Devenish chair Owen Brennan in 2013. The vision was to
create a truly sustainable example of meat production, complimenting the past 60 centuries of
farming activity. By mapping all the ‘signals’ to the farmer they were able to make decisions on the
best fit solutions and the results are the development of climate smart red meat production. John
Gilland labels the landscape as the ‘performance house’ for ruminants. John and the Dowth team
have not stopped at the carbon intensity of meat production on the site but are looking at the health
benefits of grass-fed meat, including the bioavailability of nutrients in beef and lamb raised at
Dowth.
The knowledge plus complexity involved is proving the equation set out at Wageningen. Dowth have
pioneered a precision landscape approach, using high resolution LiDAR (laser) technology, GPS
precision soil sampling and accurate carbon foot printing to gather a huge amount of data on the
farm. This information is processed, and the flowing outcomes are delivered:
1. Measurement of total above ground carbon. This is calculated from the total above ground
biomass on the farm in hedges, trees, scrub, grassland, and woodland at a moment in time.
The data can be regathered on a 5-10 yearly basis and the increases in above ground
biomass and therefore carbon calculated.
2. Measurement of below ground carbon. Soil samples are plotted using GPS and taken from 0-
30cm horizon using the International Panel on Climate Change protocol. The samples are
then analysed for carbon as well as the more usual macro and micronutrients. As per the
above ground carbon, this can be resampled at intervals to measure fluxes in carbon.
3. Measurement of farm emissions. Using the SRUC ‘agrecalc’ tool the emissions of the farm
are measured to ISO 14067:2018. The emissions can then be deducted from the carbon
stored on the farm over a period. Using this information David Hagan has calculated that at
two livestock units per ha, the beef produced at Dowth is carbon neutral, when 665 tonnes
of carbon dioxide equivalents are sequestered in the above ground biomass and below
ground soils of the farm.
4. Overland flows. The LIDAR survey also gives the ability to plot the catchment area of each
watercourse very accurately. Overlayed with rainfall data, this gives the precise location and
size of the pollution potential of each catchment on the farm. Biological interventions
designed to cope with the waterflow, and nutrient loading can be planted in the locations
identified by the LIDAR survey analysis. Short rotation willow coppice is a good fit as it can
use the captured nutrients and water to supply biomass for energy production or animal
feed.
The team at Dowth have added further management interventions to increase the carbon
sequestration at Dowth by improving soil pH, increasing the use of legumes within the sward,
reducing the age of trees and hedges to encourage more vigorous growth, and incorporating
agroforestry in the grazing platform. All this will reduce the carbon footprint of the livestock
production on site or allow increases in stocking rate. All the discussions with John and the team are
thought provoking, however a discussion on the possibilities for the use of surplus forages for energy
production, using anaerobic digestion rather than increasing stocking rate, gave an interesting
perspective to take away.