--- Exploring the Issues ---

BG-12.8 Sustainable Agriculture Exploring the Issues ■ ■Agriculture has been a key player in the global pattern of continual yet unsustainable growth.

The more predictable a food supply is, the bigger a population it can support. This sets up the following cycle: an increase in agriculture yields causes a decrease in the cost of food, which causes an increase in population size, which then requires an additional increase in food production. The cycle continues, but because Earth is a finite size, continued human population growth is not sustainable in the long term. ■ ■Population increases and intensified land use for agricultural production have often been achieved at the expense of the surrounding natural ecosystem. This scene has been replayed many times globally since agriculture began, and many former civilizations have ended (in part) because of unsustainable agricultural production practices, including the Sumerians at Ur, Easter Island (Rapa Nui), and Greenland’s Vikings. ■ ■It is important to remember that not all civilizations ended with the intensification of agricultural production. Some civilizations successfully farmed the same area and lands for thousands of years while maintaining/ preserving the natural resources. These include China, Egypt, and parts of Northern Europe.

By looking at these practices, both in the past and how they have been adapted for present use, we can learn about various strategies to improve agricultural sustainability. ■ ■Over the past century, humans have transformed their relationship with the natural world, greatly increasing their use of Earth’s natural resources. This has led to environmental degradation over time, and some of that degradation will not be reversible. ■ ■The global trend is towards increasing scarcities of our natural agricultural resources, including land, water, forests, fish, and biodiversity. With the intensification of human activities, there have been increasing pressures on the world’s natural agricultural resources. This is starting to cause negative changes in Earth’s ecological functioning. The increasing global population will require new strategies to maintain/increase food production while taking steps to protect and preserve the natural environment. ■ ■Global food demand is rising and changing, with increased demand for livestock products, fish, fruits, vegetables, oils, and sugar.

Despite these trends towards increased global consumption, there are also a significant number of people who are undernourished or who have micronutrient deficiencies. All people need access to food at reasonable prices, and this must be a consideration of agricultural sustainability; food needs to be affordable, especially for the poorest and most vulnerable populations.