--- Page 3 ---

BG-12.3 Sustainable Agriculture Introduction We are all eaters; we all require food. The way that we choose to meet our dietary needs will affect the future health of the planet. Agriculture is necessary to support Earth’s human population; we now need to find and implement ways to create healthy and adequate food while protecting and preserving the natural resources that agricultural production depends on.

When we look at both the recent and distant agricultural past, we can find many examples of successes and failures that can guide our decision-making processes as both producers and consumers of food today. We can use this information to improve the sustainability of the food system, starting with agriculture.

What is sustainable agriculture?

It is working towards a balance between food production activities and protection of the natural resources that agriculture depends on. In addition, it is the food system’s ability to generate adequate income to compensate farmers for their time, labour, and risk while they produce agricultural products that are affordable enough for consumers to purchase.

Nutritional needs should also be considered and included when making decisions about sustainable food production (consider caloric, protein, and micronutrient needs).

Three pillars of sustainability There are three pillars of sustainability: economic, social, and environmental. All three must be considered and a balance among them established when creating and maintaining sustainable food systems. ■ ■Economic sustainability: The ability to produce more food with the same inputs or to produce the same amount of food with fewer inputs. ■ ■Social sustainability: Sustainable systems must provide desirable working conditions/lifestyles for those who are involved with agricultural production, and the food that is produced must be affordable for consumers. ■ ■Environmental sustainability: Production practices must preserve and protect the natural ecosystem that farming depends on.

An example of these three pillars of sustainability in action can be found in Norman Borlaug’s “Green Revolution.” In the 1950s and 1960s, Borlaug bred new rust-resistant dwarf wheat varieties that, when fertilized with nitrogen, increased grain yield worldwide by 150% between the years 1950 and 1992. The new dwarf wheat varieties put more energy into large seeds than tall straw, which created larger yields per acre. Yields were also improved because the new varieties were less susceptible to the wheat disease known as rust. However, Borlaug’s system also required heavy use of nitrogen fertilizer and fossil fuels, and a high degree of mono-cropping.