--- Conference 54 held at Gustavus Adolphus College in Minnesota, USA, on the 2nd of October 2018, ---

Agronomy 2020, 10, 605 5 of 16 soils and agriculture”. On the other hand, it is also important to consider the impact that agriculture and soils have on climate change and global warming because current estimates indicate that 10–12% of global anthropogenic greenhouse gas emission are attributed to agriculture [28].

So how can the world produce enough food to feed 9.5 billion people in 2050 and achieve food and nutritional security with minimal or zero impact on climate change? Presenting during the Nobel Conference 54 held at Gustavus Adolphus College in Minnesota, USA, on the 2nd of October 2018, Rattan Lal stated that, inter alia, by “Increasing agronomic productivity from existing land, restoring degraded lands, enhancing biological nitrogen ﬁxation by legumes and converting some agricultural land for nature conservancy without any conversion of natural land to agroecosystems, through eco-intensiﬁcation and restoration of soil health”. He deﬁned eco-intensiﬁcation as the strategy to produce more food from less land, per drop of water, per unit of input fertilizers and pesticides, per unit of energy, and per unit of carbon emission. Shahid and Al-Shankiti. [27] assert that, “Increased production is projected to come primarily from intensiﬁcation on existing cultivated land, or on improving marginal lands, with irrigation playing a key role”. The approach suggested by Rattan Lal can be achieved by employing proven and practical climate-smart agriculture techniques such as conservation agriculture, improved water and nutrient management, integrated nutrient management, improved grazing, intercropping livestock management, etc. [27]. The practice of increasing agronomic productivity from existing land without any conversion of natural land to agroecosystems is key to preserving the soil organic matter content. According to Giller et al. [29], conversion of land from forest or grassland to agriculture rapidly increases the rate of decline in soil organic matter (SOM), with up to 50% of the SOM being lost within 10 to 15 years.

In addressing crop productivity and food security while protecting the resource base with minimal eﬀect on the environment, the formulation for the combination of conservation techniques must be site speciﬁc and should strictly be used as recommendations in other areas where similar soils and environmental/climatic conditions may exist. Conservation agriculture is one of the eﬀective and sustainable land management strategies falling under climate-smart agriculture that can be adopted to achieve eco-intensiﬁcation and restore soil quality. As stated by Malobane et al. [30], conservation agriculture is an agricultural management practice promoted in many regions worldwide because of its ability to enhance soil quality while conserving natural resources with minimal negative impact to the environment”. Integrated nutrient management is another climate-smart conservation technique that combines the use of both organic and inorganic sources to rebuild soil organic matter in nutrient depleted soils, improve soil quality, increase crop yield and protect the natural resource base [27]. 3.1. The Eﬀect of CA on Soil Quality Soil quality is the capacity of a soil to function within ecosystem boundaries, sustain biological productivity, maintain environmental quality, and promote plant and animal health [8]. The beneﬁcial eﬀects of CA in terms of better soil quality are reﬂected through an improvement in soil organic carbon in the top 10 cm soil depth [7,31], enhanced water inﬁltration rate as indicated in Figure 2 [22,32], enhanced water holding capacity [11,22], lower bulk density [11,33], higher aggregates stability [7,33] and better soil structure [33]. For improved water inﬁltration and capture, SOM can be maintained by limiting soil aggregates and structure breakdown through tillage practices. The results in Figure 2 were obtained in an experiment conducted by He et al. [32] in the semi-arid south central Shanxi province of China under Chromic Cambisol (sand 23.1%, silt 43.3% and clay 33.6%). The area receives mean annual temperature and rainfall of 10.7 ◦C and 555 mm, respectively. The researchers reported that total inﬁltration under no-till (NT) was greater, and the ﬁnal (steady state) inﬁltration rate for NT plots (17.0 mm.min−1) was four times that of the conventional tillage (CT) plots (4.25 mm.min−1). Figure 2 indicates that no-till practice enables the soil to signiﬁcantly absorb more water volumes since it has a better inﬁltration rate compare with the soil under CT practices. These results are congruent with the ﬁndings by Wang et al. [34] who investigated the eﬀects of wheat stubble and traditional ploughing on runoﬀ, inﬁltration, and soil loss in laboratory plots under rainfall simulation using clay loam soil in