--- 3.4. The Role of Agrimats in the Adoption of CA ---

Agronomy 2020, 10, 605 11 of 16 runoﬀby 37%. In addition, reduction of runoﬀ, under reduced tillage mulch when compared with conventional tillage was 33%, 39% and 27% during the tomato, sweet maize and onion crop growing seasons, respectively [46]. This indicates that mulching, no-till or reduced tillage practices or CA in general should not only be limited to dry (arid and semi-arid) regions because soil erosion threatens agriculture across diﬀerent agro-ecological areas. According to Dahiya et al. [45], the major advantage of maintaining crop residues in sub-humid and semi-arid regions, is improved soil and surface conditions that allow better water inﬁltration.

The extreme weather events such as ﬂoods due to aggressive hailstorms with high-wind speed as a result of climate change are causing not only damage to the crops in semi-arid areas but they wash away all the loose organic materials used as mulch, together with top fertile soil through run-oﬀ[13,47]. This challenge has led to many agricultural soils in semi-arid areas becoming prone to (i) rain drop impact, which leads to soil erosion through runoﬀ, (ii) high rates of evaporation due to high temperatures and (iii) poorly aerated soils because of low organic matter content in the soil [13]. The eﬀect of soil erosion and impact of adverse weather conditions on mulching materials used as permanent soil cover could be reduced even by poor resourced smallholder farmers practicing in semi-arid regions.

Onwona-Agyeman et al. [13] proposed and used a pressurized steam and compression technology to produce mulching materials called agrimats from diﬀerent types of organic waste materials. In an experiment conducted at Gifu University in Japan to study soil erosion, Onwona-Agyeman et al. [13] placed agrimats on gentle and steep slopes in the ﬁeld and their results indicated that agrimats could reduce soil erosion by 94.4% and 92.3% on steep (30◦) and gentle (5◦) slopes, respectively.

Although the paper by Onwona-Agyeman et al. [13] does not describe the climatic conditions and soil properties of the study site, the area received 254.3 mm of rainfall during the four-month period of the experiment. Agrimats are designed to withstand high-speed runoﬀwater and blowing away by heavy storms and strong winds respectively, as typically experienced in semi-arid environments. In addition, the agrimats serve as an innovative permanent and sustainable soil cover that lasts for at least two years before they completely decompose into the soil [13]. However, extensive research is needed, especially in Southern Africa; to critically compare and contrast the eﬀectiveness of agrimats to other traditional soil amendments and mulching methods (especially compost, manures and biochars) across diﬀerent climatic conditions and soil types. The current study puts emphasis on dry areas since they are more susceptible to crop failure and food insecurity due to global climate change [4]. The low adoption rate of conservation agriculture (CA) in semi-arid areas by smallholder farmers is attributed to the prioritization of crop residues for livestock use rather than soil mulching [14]. Theirfelder et al. [48] states that “Although the practice of CA can provide many beneﬁts for smallholder farmers in Southern Africa, large-scale spontaneous adoption has been hampered by a number of constraints.

The constraints include trade-oﬀs between residue retention and livestock feed in mixed crop-livestock systems”. 3.4. The Role of Agrimats in the Adoption of CA Conservation Agriculture (CA) is deﬁned as a method of managing ecosystems for improved and sustained productivity, increased proﬁts and food security while preserving and enhancing the resource base and the environment [6]. Several researchers have proved over years that permanent soil cover is one of the most eﬀective practices in CA systems that help to increase soil organic matter [6,7,31].

Since soil is a living entity, organic matter is to the soil what a heart is to the body–without organic matter, soil is dead. Increase in soil organic matter promotes aggregation, pore geometry and stability of aggregates as it acts as a binding/cementing agent and most importantly, it improves soil fertility and overall quality of the soil [7,49]. However, the major constraints keeping smallholder farmers from leaving and/or applying crop residues in the ﬁeld as permanent soil cover is the prioritization of using crop residues to feed livestock instead of for mulching [14].

Agrimats could prove a viable option even for farmers who want to maximize proﬁt since they are manufactured using freely available biomass instead of valuable crop residues that remain after grain