--- Page 10 ---

SUSTAINABLE AGRICULTURE PRINCIPLES & PRACTICES 10 Resources and Markets PRINCIPLE An agricultural sector that ensures the efficient use of resources and fair and effective markets, creating resilient farm businesses and supply chains that are able to adapt to changing markets and resource availability.

PRACTICES Resource efficiency, productivity and market effectiveness are strongly linked to the Livelihoods principle. Practices which support resource use efficiency, productivity and market stability include: • Ensure availability of required resources to produce efficiently, at a fair price. • Track and optimise input use, including fertilisers, pesticides, manure, water, labour.

Focus on productivity. • Assess use of inputs with respect to yields, profitability and quality to identify areas for improved efficiency and to meet market requirements. • Facilitate and make use of available technology, including remote sensing etc. • Drive innovation, including genetics, machinery, training, inputs etc. • Use regionally appropriate plants and livestock, allowing for greater efficiencies in water, land and other resources, and aligned to labour requirements and availability. • Assess resource efficiency using a whole farm approach, taking into account aspects such as equipment and labour requirements etc. • Create efficient supply and demand, by implementing mutually beneficial supply agreements and communicating farm production levels as well as updates in supply chain demand. • Ensure quality requirements are clearly communicated and measures to meet the requirements are implemented. • Facilitate the establishment of farmer cooperatives and associations, where appropriate. • Support the development of circular economies, which ensure waste becomes a co-product.

CONTEXT Sustainability of the agricultural sector requires access to sufficient resources and efficient use of resources, including elimination of waste. Agricultural resources range from inputs such as fertilisers and agri-chemicals, animal feed, medicines and feed additives, to land and equipment, financial and legal services, insurance, labour, and plants and livestock. Market access is fundamental to the stability of agricultural economy and is strongly influenced by the fairness and effectiveness of the supply chain.

SUPPORTING THE SDGs