--- Land and Soil ---

SUSTAINABLE AGRICULTURE
PRINCIPLES & PRACTICES
4

Land and Soil
PRINCIPLE
An agricultural sector that ensures land use is appropriate
given the characteristics of the terrain, maintains soil fertility
and health, prevents damage and provides benefits to the
surrounding environment, and ensures the land acts
a significant greenhouse gas sink.
PRACTICES
Land and soil management is interdependent with the management of other principles,
notably Nature, Water, and Climate as well as Communities, Resources and Markets,
and Livelihoods. Good land and soil management is important to ensure a farm’s
continued profitability and to protect long-term soil sustainability; practices include:
• Assess land by taking into account the prior use of land e.g. historical/archaeological
remains, topography and soil type, soil pollution issues or land change from forest
to agricultural land, availability and quality of water resources, importance for
biodiversity and surrounding ecosystems, pest disease and weed levels and
potential impact of the production on adjacent crops and the adjacent area.
• Minimise land use change, unless supported by the findings of a land assessment.
• Promote healthy soils (high levels of microbial activity, higher levels of organic
matter, and a good structure). Ways to retain, build and restore soil health include:
no-till or reduced tillage; cover cropping; mulching; nutrient management; keeping
the soil covered with plant material as much as possible; reducing soil disturbance;
ensuring year-round plant cover; and using an appropriate crop rotation combined
with cover crops.
• Sequester carbon by planting trees, shrubs, and perennial plants with deep
root systems.
• Ensure choice of cultivation methodology takes into consideration soil type and
topography, soil conditions, proximity to waterbodies, equipment limitations etc.
• Implement practices for retaining water and preventing soil erosion, through
permanent perennial cover such as hedgerows, planting native grasses in marginal
land, buffer strips, etc.
• Assess impact on the surrounding ecosystem and communities and identify
co-beneficial activities which promote multiple positive outcomes, such as increased
soil organic matter leading to improved biodiversity and reduced carbon footprint.
• Identify and implement innovative carbon sequestration techniques.
CONTEXT
Healthy soils support diverse
communities of plants, animals,
and soil biota, cycle nutrients, improve
water and air quality, and maximise
crop production. Land dedicated to
agriculture comprises 12% of global
landmass, of which 25% is at risk of,
or has already become, highly degraded1.
Degraded land includes eroded soil,
loss of fertility, and/or a loss of ecosystem
function, as well as having a detrimental
impact on the surrounding environment,
for example decreased biodiversity,
increased carbon emissions, and
disruptions to the hydrological cycle
and diminished water quality.
SUPPORTING THE SDGs
1 FAO. 2011. The state of the world’s land and water resources
for food and agriculture (SOLAW) – Managing systems at risk.
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations.
Rome and Earthscan, London. (also available at http://www.
fao.org/3/i1688e/i1688e.pdf)