--- Agroecology and the Design of Sustainable Agroecosystems ---

d. Promote pest regulation through enhanced activity of biological control agents achieved
by introducing and/or conserving natural enemies and antagonists.
Research on diversified cropping systems underscores the great importance of diversity in
an agricultural setting (Francis 1986, Vandermeer 1989, Altieri 1995). Diversity is of
value in agroecosystems for a variety of reasons (Altieri 1994, Gliessman 1998):
• As diversity increases, so do opportunities for coexistence and beneficial interactions
between species that can enhance agroecosystem sustainability.
• Greater diversity often allows better resource-use efficiency in an agroecosystem.
There is better system-level adaptation to habitat heterogeneity, leading to
complementarity in crop species needs, diversification of niches, overlap of species
niches, and partitioning of resources.
• Ecosystems in which plant species are intermingled possess an associated resistance
to herbivores as in diverse systems there is a greater abundance and diversity of
natural enemies of pest insects keeping in check the populations of individual
herbivore species.
• A diverse crop assemblage can create a diversity of microclimates within the cropping
system that can be occupied by a range of noncrop organisms - including beneficial
predators, parasites, pollinators, soil fauna and antagonists - that are of importance
for the entire system.
• Diversity in the agricultural landscape can contribute to the conservation of
biodiversity in surrounding natural ecosystems.
• Diversity in the soil performs a variety of ecological services such as nutrient
recycling and detoxification of noxious chemicals and regulation of plant growth.
• Diversity reduces risk for farmers, especially in marginal areas with more
unpredictable environmental conditions. If one crop does not do well, income from
others can compensate.

Agroecology and the Design of Sustainable Agroecosystems

Most people involved in the promotion of sustainable agriculture aim at creating a form of
agriculture that maintains productivity in the long term by (Pretty 1994, Vandermeer
1995):

• optimizing the use of locally available resources by combining the different
components of the farm system, i.e. plants, animals, soil, water, climate and people,
so that they complement each other and have the greatest possible synergetic effects;
• reducing the use of off-farm, external and non-renewable inputs with the greatest
potential to damage the environment or harm the health of farmers and consumers, and
a more targeted use of the remaining inputs used with a view to minimizing variable
costs;