--- 3.3. Overview of Circular Economy ---

Agri-Food: Part Three of the Global Sector Best Practices Series | 3 Canadian consumers by 10%,11 avoid 56.5 million tonnes of CO2 equivalent,12 and reduce Canada’s blue water footprint by 1.4 billion tonnes.13 Given the quantum of waste generated by the agri-food industry, there exists tremendous potential to reduce waste through more circular practices. Businesses have a large role in this transiiton.

Globally, 50% of every dollar spent in the food industry is related to restaurants,14 and as the popularity of restaurants has grown, the restaurant industry has been a growing contributor to food waste. In Canada, restaurants and institutions waste food valued at C$7.4 billion annually.15 In the United Kingdom restaurants generate nearly one million tonnes of waste every year, and three-quarters of this waste is edible food.16 This food waste costs the United Kingdom’s hospitality and restaurant industry C$4.3 billion annually.17 By 2050, 80% of food is expected to be consumed in cities.

Cities therefore have a unique role in transforming the circular economy of food.18 For example, cities can collaborate with local food producers to source substantial amounts of food from peri- urban areas, which already hold 40% of the world’s cropland, and increase the resilience of urban food systems.19 Cities can also enact municipally-run programs to educate their residents on the costs of food waste, as well as how to support circular economic practices and build relationships with local food producers.20 Shorter supply chains can also be achieved through the development of urban hydroponic farms that deliver produce directly from rooftops to consumers.21 If cities were to enhance local and regenerative food production, use food waste and by-products efficiently, and provide easier access to more nutritious foods, an estimated C$3.6 trillion in global annual benefits could be generated by 2050, including over C$920 billion in economic benefits.22 These approaches would also reduce greenhouse gas emissions by 4.3 billion tonnes of CO2 equivalent and prevent the degradation of 15 million hectares of arable land.23 There are also many improvements that can be applied to reduce both inputs and waste products in food production. In the UK, for example, all 1.6 million fields that provide agricultural goods are monitored for agricultural data to ensure that they are being managed in the most sustainable way possible.24 3.3. Overview of Circular Economy Practices in the Agri-Food Sector Agri-food companies have begun to invest in researching and implementing circular solutions to address food loss and waste.

Figure 3-1 summarizes the specific practices employed in the agri-food sector, organized according to the four objectives for a circular economy and twelve core supporting strategies described in the Introduction to this publication series. Some of these are highlighted below. This is followed by a listing of applied examples of these strategies and practices, with hyperlinks to additional information. Canadian examples are denoted by a red superscript (CDN).

Objectives, Strategies, and Practices In the agri-food sector, a key focus of circular economy objectives is REDUCED resource consumption. One way to do this is by integrating ecodesign elements into corporate mandates.

For instance, Arla dairy farmers have begun to design farms that reduce carbon emissions and improve sustainability through increased energy efficiency. Another way to reduce resource consumption is increased production efficiency through process Figure 3-1. Circular economy objectives, strategies and practices found in the agri-food sector Objectives Strategies Practices Reduced resource consumption Ecodesign Process optimization Agroecology Zero waste grocery delivery Zero waste grocery stores Shorter supply chains Digital food waste tracking Energy efficiency Agrimetrics yield tracking Quality control