--- 3.1.	 Introduction to Agri-Food ---

2 | Smart Prosperity Institute AGRI-FOOD 3.1. Introduction to Agri-Food The Circular Economy Global Sector Best Practices series aims to provide a starting point, background resource, and rich reference source for future efforts to engage Canadian firms and innovators in the journey towards a circular economy, and to build sector- based roadmaps to a circular economy in Canada.

This report profiles the agri-food sector. It begins with an outline of the economic and environmental importance of the sector, including data on economic potential of waste resources where available. It then profiles the existing circular practices that were identified in the sector, organized according to a common framework for circular economy approaches and strategies developed in 2018 by L’Institut EDDEC in collaboration with RECYC-QUÉBEC, and described in the Introduction to the series.

This profile begins with a high-level summary of the circular practices found in each sector, and snapshots of these practices in application, and then moves on to list applied, real world examples for each of these strategies and practices. It provides a list of additional resources for researchers, practitioners, and policy-makers, as well as selected global public policies, and an annotated bibliography of key reports specific to circularity for agri-food. 3.2. Background Food demand will grow significantly as the world’s population grows: feeding a world population of 9.1 billion in 2050 will require food production to increase by 70% from 2005 levels.1 The demand for animal-based products is also expected to grow by 70% by 2050.2 Yet, a third of all food produced globally is wasted each year, amounting to about 1.3 billion tonnes annually,3 enough to feed 3 billion people and worth an estimated C$1.3 trillion.4 Additionally, the agri-food industry is responsible for almost one quarter of global greenhouse gas emissions.5 Currently, 56% of food waste occurs in developed countries.6 North America and Oceania waste the most calories per person, per day, more than twice as much as Europe, and more than 3 times as much as South and Southeast Asia.7 In Canada, 58% of all food produced is lost or wasted, amounting to 35.5 million metric tonnes.8 Of this waste, 11.2 million metric tonnes, worth C$49.5 billion, could be prevented.9 Avoidable food loss and waste occurs throughout the supply chain. The top three sources of avoidable food loss and waste in Canada are manufacturing (23%), households (21%), and processing (20%).10 Preventing food waste in the supply chain could reduce the cost of food to