--- Ostara Nutrient Recovery ---

6 | Smart Prosperity Institute
Specific Examples: Objective 1, Reduced
Resource Consumption

Ecodesign

Agroecology
• Mulberry Fish Pond model28 in Southern China
uses a traditional Vietnamese technique of farming
that maximizes land and nutrient use. It integrates
mulberry cultivation, sericulture, and fish
farming to create a highly efficient human-made
ecosystem with minimal waste.
• Zero Budget Farming29 in India aims to reduce
the risk of debt for smallholder farms. It has
four pillars: create soil that contains beneficial
microbes; prevent crop disease through natural
seed coatings; protect and enhance topsoil
through mulching; and make better use of water.
Applying these pillars has reduced farming costs
and improved crop yield by upwards of 40% for
the 160,000 farmers practicing the technique.
By 2024, they aim to scale up to 6 million zero-
budget farmers.
• Agroforestry30 is an agriculture technique widely
used in Brazil and other parts of South America. It
refers to any technique that combines forestry with
agriculture or livestock. Forest management, e.g.,
pruning, produces organic matter that nourishes
the soil and helps crops grow. The resulting
system is highly biodiverse and productive.
• Seawater Farming31 is an innovative technique that
addresses the lack of freshwater and undesirable
soil conditions in coastal regions. The technique
was successfully applied to create a productive
fish farm in Eritrea.
• 3D Ocean Farming by GreenWave32 is an
American organization spearheading vertical
farming made possible by 3D printed structures
to grow scallops, clams, oysters, seaweeds, and
kelps at different depths of the water column.
Thimble Island Ocean Farm applies this technique
and produces 30 tonnes of seaweed and 250,000
shellfish every five months. Farming less than 5%
of US waters with this technique could sequester
135 million tons of carbon and 10 million tons of
nitrogen.

Energy efficiency
• Arla Foods dairy farm33 in Denmark uses the heat
of milk to heat the underfloor of the farmhouse.
Warm air is generated when the fresh milk from
the cows is cooled from 37°C to 4°C. It is then
pumped from the milk tank to the farmhouse.

Zero waste grocery stores
• Nu Grocery34 is an Ottawa-based grocery
store that strives to eliminate packaging waste.
Customers bring reusable containers to the store
which they can then fill with the exact quantity of
goods they wish to purchase.
Zero waste grocery delivery
• Loblaw Companies Limited and Loop35 CDN
launched a pilot program in 2021 that will deliver
select products in reusable containers right to
the door of customers. When finished with the
product, the packaging is collected, cleaned, and
refilled by Loop.

The Ideal
•
Sustainable agricultural production techniques
are mainstreamed
•
Packaging waste and food waste are eliminated
from the food supply chain
Ostara Nutrient Recovery
Technologies: Converting
wastewater nutrients into fertilizer
Ostara Nutrient Recovery Technologies is a Vancouver-
based company that uses a unique nutrient recovery
strategy that can be easily integrated into bio-based
wastewater plants. Their ‘Pearl Nutrient Recovery
Process’ captures up to 85% of the phosphorus and up
to 15% of the nitrogen in wastewater. These captured
nutrients are then transformed into pure fertilizer granules
and used to make a nutrient rich fertilizer called Crystal
Green. This fertilizer is a continuous release, root-
activated product, which only releases nutrients when
certain acids are given off by growing plant roots. Using
Crystal Green in lieu of an equivalent standard fertilizer
can eliminate up to 10 tons of CO2 emissions per one ton
of fertilizer used.27