--- Sustainable Value Creation from Food Loss and ---

8 | Smart Prosperity Institute
using cover crops.30 The manure produced by these animals
can be used as a fertilizer, reducing the reliance on synthetic
fertilizers. In the overall system, livestock are credited with
providing beneficial ecosystem services such as reducing
erosion, increasing carbon sequestration, and increasing
biodiversity.31
Regenerative agriculture and its practices play a key role
in a circular agriculture system.32 The implementation of
regenerative agriculture can reduce the number of synthetic
inputs required. Synthetic fertilizer application can be reduced
by using organic fertilizers and rotating diverse and nitrogen-
fixing crops. The application of pesticides can be reduced by
using crop rotations to minimize the success of pest species.
By reducing the need to input these substances, circularity
is improved as the production of these substances is highly
energy-intensive, the use of virgin resources is lowered, and the
pollution risks of pesticide inputs are reduced. Additionally, the
use of no- and reduced-till soil management helps preserve soil
through reduced erosion, sequesters carbon, improves water
retention, and reduces the emissions of GHGs from fossil fuels
burned to operate ploughs. Overall, regenerative agriculture
plays an important role in achieving aspects of circularity at a
farm level and offers farmers the opportunity to reduce inputs
and optimize ecosystem services.
The adoption rate of regenerative agriculture in Canada
is not known but many farmers are already implementing
select practices (e.g., reduced- or zero tillage). The Canadian
government supports research on regenerative agriculture best
practices through the Living Laboratory initiatives in the Eastern
Prairies,33 as well as financially assisting farmers in the process
of transitioning to environmentally friendly farming practices
through the Canadian Agricultural Partnership. Some of the
programs vary provincially but can include cost-sharing for
cover cropping, use of organic soil amendments, reduced or
no-till practices and many others.34

The Bioeconomy
There are many definitions of the bioeconomy. In the broadest
sense, a bioeconomy is all sectors and systems that rely on
biological resources (animals, plants, micro-organisms and
derived biomass, including organic waste), their functions and
principles.35 This is the definition presented by the European
Commission and used in Canada’s Bioeconomy Strategy by
Bioindustrial Innovation Canada.36 Other definitions put more
focus on the role of innovation when defining the bioeconomy.
The OECD, for example, defines bioeconomy as, “transforming
life science knowledge into new, sustainable, eco-efficient
and competitive products”.37 Due to this lack of consistency,
the scope of what is considered as the bioeconomy may
differ between countries. However, for the most part, food
production and security play a large role in bioeconomy
strategies.
The bioeconomy and the circular economy are conceptually
linked since shifting from non-renewable resources to
biomaterials is an important aspect of the circular economy.38
Bioeconomy practices that can contribute to the development
of a circular economy include the creation of biofuels,
bioenergy, innovative bio-based products such as textiles,
composites, pharmaceuticals, and chemicals.39 Biofuels and
bioenergy, a lower-carbon substitute for fossil fuels, can be
created through the industrial processing of lumber, crops
such as soy and corn, used or virgin plant oils, and food
waste. 40 There are also many innovations in bio-textiles and
bio-composites made from purpose-grown crops including
perennial grasses, hemp and flax.41
The Canadian Agricultural Partnership supports the
development of bioeconomy opportunities in Canada’s
agricultural industry.42 As of 2015, Canada had 5,618
individuals employed in the bioeconomy sector, producing
biofuels, plant-based plastics, biocomposites and chemicals.
These activities produced $4.27 billion in revenue.43 In 2019,
the BioDesign consortium published a national bioeconomy
strategy with Bioindustrial Innovation Canada, Forest Products
Association of Canada, FPInnovations, BIOTECanada, and
BioNB.44 This laid out the industry’s vision for achieving the
highest value for Canadian biomass and residuals alongside
reducing the carbon footprint of these activities.
Given Canada’s large biomass stock and skilled workforce,
continued growth in the sector is expected as Canada aims to
become one of the world’s most competitive bioeconomies.45
This in turn is likely to increase the demand for feedstock from
the agriculture and agri-food sector and support for circularity.

Sustainable Value Creation from Food Loss and
Waste
While designing out waste is a key principle of the circular
economy, the generation of some food waste is inevitable in
the agriculture and agri-food sector. However, this represents a
tremendous opportunity for new value creation.
According to the Commission for Environmental Cooperation,
food loss and waste (FLW) represents the total amount of food
in the supply chain that is not consumed. Food loss is defined as
food that is intended for human consumption but, through poor
functioning of the food production and supply chain, is reduced
in quantity or quality and, therefore, discarded. This includes
food that is not harvested, that spoils during distribution or is
disposed of due to food grading during the processing stage.
Food waste is defined as food for human consumption that is
discarded (both edible and inedible parts) due to intentional
behaviours.46 Examples include food thrown away by retail
stores, catering businesses, hospitals, and schools, as well as
household waste.