--- Version 2: The ideological underpinnings ---

Sustainable agriculture and food systems Comparing contrasting and contested versions 35  Chatham House evidence has been well reviewed – at least, considering organic agriculture as a suite of agroecological approaches142 – and, typically, agroecological farming approaches have lower aggregate environmental impacts.

Critique: There are numerous ways in which these conclusions can be open to criticism (e.g. geographical bias according to study location, scale bias – focusing on farms, and ignoring landscape characteristics – and product bias). However, when such biases have been addressed, and like-for-like comparisons made, organic farms are typically better in terms of biodiversity, though the effect varies depending on the plant or animal group under consideration.143 The sustainability of agroecological approaches at the level of the farm is therefore rather less contested than the observation that a farm producing the same amount of output would need to be, on average, larger than an otherwise identical conventionally intensive farm (and thus relatively land-inefficient). Therefore, the principal critique is that in a world where demand is assumed to grow, land-inefficient production methods require more land in order to produce the amount of food required, with implications for the ability to spare land for nature. Whether agroecological approaches are more ‘sustainable’ at the system level therefore depends on the extent that demand can change and can accordingly reduce the overall requirement for food.

Version 2: The ideological underpinnings This version of the linkage between agroecological approaches and food system sustainability rests on ideologies that range from living in better harmony with nature (the notion of stewardship), to reducing the risks to society from crossing planetary boundaries (and variants of ‘doomsday-ism’).144 Unlike Version 1, which often sees nature as a form of capital that can be converted into monetary capital, Version 2 can see natural capital as humanity’s ‘life support’, and as both irreplaceable and irreducible.

Conceptually, it may be possible for Version 2 to occur: structural changes to the market would enable demand-side reductions sufficient for the production of enough foods to fulfil nutritional needs from agroecological approaches, while also sharing land with nature. However, in order for that to happen, very significant social, regulatory and thus structural changes would need to take place within food systems.

In particular, there is an explicit need to limit consumption to what can be produced sustainably: this need runs counter to the predominant ideology of free-market capitalism, which assumes that supply should be innovated to allow demand to be fulfilled. Rather than putting economic growth at the heart of economic thinking, a more holistic approach would be needed to recognize citizens’ well-being145 as more important (combining, in part, human health benefits and access to a safe and enriching natural environment). Thus, Version 2 requires some ‘taming’ of current 142 Seufert and Ramankutty (2017), ‘Many shades of gray–The context-dependent performance of organic agriculture’; Clark and Tilman (2017), ‘Comparative analysis of environmental impacts of agricultural production systems, agricultural input efficiency, and food choice’. 143 Gabriel et al. (2010), ‘Scale matters: the impact of organic farming on biodiversity at different spatial scales’. 144 Pepper, D. (2002), Modern Environmentalism: An Introduction, London: Routledge, https://doi.org/10.4324/ 9780203412244. 145 Fioramonti, L. et al. (2022), ‘Wellbeing economy: An effective paradigm to mainstream post-growth policies?’, Ecological Economics, 192(107261), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecolecon.2021.107261.