--- Version 1: The ideological underpinnings ---

Sustainable agriculture and food systems Comparing contrasting and contested versions 22  Chatham House would be the case if land was shared between food production and nature.73 The ‘land sparing + (sustainable intensification)’ model is taken to justify the framing that, by (sustainably) intensifying, the pressure on land will be reduced, and land will (inevitably) be spared.

Critique: While there is a very large literature and evidence base on how sustainable intensification can occur across the scale, from field to farm and to landscape, there is a relative dearth of examples of where intensification has enabled or will enable land sparing,74 and the degree to which this is regulated and strategic, or is determined by market dynamics. Thus, while the logic of the case is sound and the argument for land sparing is analytically elegant, the evidence of sustainable intensification combined with land sparing on the ground remains weak, because of the need for the governance ‘quid pro quo’ of protecting land from agricultural expansion while intensifying non-spared land. This situation is exacerbated by the spillover effects of bioenvironmental processes and through the economics of profitability. In the former case, spillovers can occur between intensively farmed land and spared land through, for example, pollution, land fragmentation and microclimatic change, all of which have indirect effects on biodiversity.75 In terms of profitability, as systems intensify, profits increase and provide an economic incentive to further expand land at the frontier of land conversion (for example, in low-income countries in the tropics).76 Thus, for sustainable intensification combined with land sparing to be a viable strategy, simultaneous strategies are required, both for the governance and protection of the spared land and for a process of intensification which has minimal environmental impact on the agricultural land. Given the economic incentives for productivity growth, ‘sustainable’ intensification has, in many circles, become a synonym primarily for increasing efficiency to favour income. Hence, a sole focus (by government or in agriculture) on increasing the efficiency of production is insufficient to deliver land sparing. As was recommended by one 2014 study, the ‘intellectual value’ of the ‘land sparing vs land sharing’ framework should be recognized, ‘[…] but also its limitations with respect to real-world application’.77 Version 1: The ideological underpinnings Version 1 of sustainable agriculture, in arguing that the future of agriculture will be necessarily based on sustainable intensification and land sparing, makes, implicitly or explicitly, a number of key assumptions. Many of the assumptions rest to a greater extent on ideology than on academic evidence. For example, 73 Reviewed in Balmford (2021), ‘Concentrating vs. spreading our footprint: how to meet humanity’s needs at least cost to nature’. 74 On this point, please see Thaler, G. M. (2017), ‘The land sparing complex: Environmental governance, agricultural intensification, and state building in the Brazilian Amazon’, Annals of the American Association of Geographers, 107(6), pp. 1424–43, https://doi.org/10.1080/24694452.2017.1309966; Rodriguez García, V., Meyfroidt, P., Gaspart, F. and Kastner, T. (2020), ‘Agricultural intensification and land use change: assessing country-level induced intensification, land sparing and rebound effect’, Dryad, Dataset, https://doi.org/10.5061/ dryad.9zw3r22b8. 75 Didham, R. K. et al. (2015), ‘Agricultural intensification exacerbates spillover effects on soil biogeochemistry in adjacent forest remnants’, PLoS ONE, 10(1), https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0116474. 76 Byerlee, D., Stevenson, J. and Villoria, N. (2014), ‘Does intensification slow crop land expansion or encourage deforestation?, Global Food Security, 3(2), pp. 92–98, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gfs.2014.04.001. 77 Fischer et al. (2014), ‘Land sparing versus land sharing: moving forward’.