--- Meadows, D. H. (1999), ‘Leverage Points: Places to intervene in a system’, Report, Hartland, VT: The Sustainability ---

Sustainable agriculture and food systems Comparing contrasting and contested versions 7  Chatham House In short, the assumptions that are made to support a particular version of how agriculture affects the sustainability of food systems serve to channel policymakers and investment in certain directions. In turn, choosing a specific version of sustainability of agriculture has huge implications for both the amount and type of foods that are produced and for the impact of agriculture on climate change, pollution, biodiversity loss and human health. Given the urgency of tackling each of these issues, examining the robustness of the underlying assumptions that support a given direction of travel will reduce the risks of a ‘path dependence’ that aims to increase sustainability but does not achieve the necessary sustainability goals.

Unpacking the narratives that support different ‘versions’ of sustainable agriculture To analyse the principal narratives on sustainable agriculture, this paper contrasts alternative ‘versions’, conceptually similar to ‘mindsets’ or paradigms, originally described by Donella Meadows in 1999 thus: ‘The mindset or paradigm out of which the system – its goals, power structure, rules, its culture – arises’.9 The ‘versions’ of sustainable agriculture within sustainable food systems presented below (Table 1) bear some similarities to the contrasting hypothetical cases described above. Version 1 focuses on agricultural intensification to raise yields per unit of area through production gains, while minimizing environmental impacts (primarily focusing on the efficiency of agricultural production), and ‘sparing’ land from agriculture. Version 2 focuses on agroecological (nature-friendly) approaches that produce lower yields but with lower environmental impacts, and thus contributes to ‘sharing’ land with nature/wildlife.

The key assumptions made in the arguments that link agricultural practice at the farm level and the impacts on food systems more generally are laid out in Table 1 (and discussed at length below). Both versions are logical and internally consistent subject to their assumptions. The core difference between the two versions is in the assumption about the future of demand (and thus the amount of land and mode of farming that are necessary to meet it). How demand may (or may not) grow depends on a range of factors, including the way the market works (or how it might work). These assumptions often have an ideological basis that is sometimes, but not always, explicitly acknowledged.

As an example of the debate, a common perspective is that intensive farming wearing the guise of ‘sustainable’ intensification is a more valid, more pragmatic, approach to sustainable food production than nature-friendly, agroecological farming. This is in spite of the fact that the vast majority of the academic literature comparing conventionally intensive and agroecological farms shows that the latter are associated with greater biodiversity, more stored carbon, more productive soils and, perhaps, less pollution. In other words, the empirical data support the claim that intensive farming is more environmentally impactful (less ‘sustainable’) at the 9 Meadows, D. H. (1999), ‘Leverage Points: Places to intervene in a system’, Report, Hartland, VT: The Sustainability Institute, text available at https://donellameadows.org/archives/leverage-points-places-to-intervene-in-a-system.