--- Source: Chatham House research. ---

Sustainable agriculture and food systems Comparing contrasting and contested versions 8  Chatham House field, farm and landscape levels, but the assumptions made about scale effects lead to the reverse conclusion. In essence, the debate is therefore not so much about the evidential basis of sustainability, but the assumptions made in its interpretation.

Table 1. Two versions of sustainable agriculture and their key assumptions: a summary Version 1 Version 2 ‘Sustainable’ intensification and land sparing to meet an inevitably increasing global demand for food.

Agroecological approaches with land sharing and sparing, enabled by demand reduction through the adoption of healthy, sustainable, low-waste food consumption.

Key assumptions Key assumptions Demand is exogenous, and will increase as population size and wealth increase.

Demand can be changed, and should be shaped by social needs.

Growing market demand requires productivity growth to raise supply.

The current unsustainability of farming is a form of market failure that can be corrected to reduce demand.

Dietary change is difficult, and is not the preserve of policy.

A healthy diet is also a (more) sustainable one.

The potential for technologically led sustainable intensification is substantial.

Agroecological approaches can supply sufficient nutrients to ‘feed the world’, if consumption patterns change.

Land sparing is enabled by sustainable intensification.

Agroecological approaches are more sustainable than sustainable intensification.

Source: Chatham House research.

A note on terminology In this paper, the terminology ‘‘‘sustainable” intensification’ is deliberately used to differentiate it from the academic concept of ‘sustainable intensification’ in Version 1. As is discussed in more detail below, ‘sustainable intensification’ is a concept that relates intensification (producing more) with a reduction in environmental impacts to increase sustainability. Conceptually, it covers a spectrum from efficiency gains in production (‘more for less’) to food system redesign.

Version 1 uses the term as co-opted by many stakeholders, and practised by many farmers, in the sense of intensifying while improving efficiency. This usage is more akin to plain intensification, and has the potential to confuse the reduction of relative impacts through efficiency gains (e.g. 10 per cent less nitrogen use per tonne of grain) with absolute impacts (increasing yields by >10 per cent will lead to absolutely more nitrogen usage and therefore larger impacts, all other things being equal). Because this is arguably not more sustainable, this paper characterizes the commonly operationalized, ‘more for less’ efficiency-gaining form of sustainable intensification as ‘sustainable’ intensification, while recognizing that other forms