--- China,India,Ivory Coast,Kenya,Mongolia,Poland,Russia,Switzerland and ---

wider public.The application of RISE in Armenia,Brazil,Columbia,Canada, China,India,Ivory Coast,Kenya,Mongolia,Poland,Russia,Switzerland and the Ukraine, allows RISE to be adapted and improved on a continuous basis. The establishment of national and regional “RISE-hubs” (compe- tence centres), which are linked in an open RISE platform, allow for locally adapted interpretations of the RISE results and proposals for appropriate measures. However, the tool as such is not locally adapted; only key val- ues like,for example,minimum salary are determined locally (cf.,chapters “RISE Methodology”and “Discussion”).RISE-hubs also promote the use of RISE and contribute to the further development of the model and its database. For specific local and detailed management questions addi- tional more specific tools may be used.

The most important goal for RISE is a contribution to the holistic improvement of sustainability in agricultural production. Strengths and potentials regarding sustainable production must be secured and strengthened while weaknesses eliminated. Deficits pinpointed in RISE assessments shall be tackled with effective measures at the farm level as well as by contributing to more favourable (enabling) framework condi- tions.In addition, the use of the tool aims at initiating a constructive dia- logue among producers, processors and consumers to spread the phi- losophy of sustainable production.This shall lead to a change of mindset and increase the awareness that more sustainable production will ben- efit all the relevant stakeholders along the supply chain.

RISE, as a management tool, is primarily focused on the requirements of farmers and farm managers.It provides an instrument to visualize strengths and potentials (providing a testimonial), but also to identify weaknesses (need for action) regarding the sustainability of the farmer’s specific pro- duction practices. Since RISE does not provide specific recipes and solu- tions it is recommended that a well-trained agricultural consultant is involved in the analysis and discussion of the sustainability evaluation.

For a holistic monitoring of the farm development, repeated RISE evalua- tions are needed.These are particularly useful to assess the impact of meas- ures implemented to improve the situation (success control). To assist in planning for improvements,different scenarios can be evaluated with RISE.

By evaluating groups of farms, RISE facilitates comparison/benchmarking with peers and the identification of framework conditions particularly con- ducive to,or unfavourable for sustainable production.This may be particu- larly attractive for political entities,the producer,trade or label organizations, the processing industry and retailers. It is a unique feature of RISE that its application as a sustainability assessment and management tool at a higher Sustainable Agriculture – From Common Principles to Common Practice 124