--- agreed under the Gothenburg Protocol. OECD coun- ---

reduce ammonia emissions to meet the 2010 targets agreed under the Gothenburg Protocol. OECD coun- tries have met the 70 per cent reduction target for methyl bromide use between 1991 and 2003 under the Montreal Protocol, due to have been completely phased-out by 2005—which was, however, not achieved.

Greenhouse gases from agriculture increased by one per cent from the Kyoto Protocol base period (1990–92), but at a lower rate of growth than for other sectors.Moreover,although information is currently limited, agriculture can also help to lower greenhouse gas emissions through increasing the soil carbon sink capacity of farmed soils, and expanding biomass supplies as a feedstock for renewable energy and raw material production. – Biodiversity.The genetic diversity of crop varieties and livestock breeds used in farming is increasing in cer- tain OECD countries, probably due to farmers’ busi- ness strategies associated with diversification, niche market development and agri-environmental policies.

However, the extent to which this is improving the environmental resilience of farming systems and low- ering disease risks is unclear.For many countries,farm- land is a major primary habitat for flora and fauna, but species richness and abundance has declined.

Farmland bird populations fell over the past decade, but in some countries populations have shown signs of recovery more recently. Adverse farm impacts on wild species are mainly due to deterioration in the quality of farmland habitats, nutrient and pesticide pollution,reduced water flows,the clearance of native vegetation and,in some areas,the conversion of farm- land with a high nature value to other uses. ● Responses: – Environmental farm management practices. Increased uptake of these practices is the result of incentives provided through government payments and regula- tions, and voluntary private-led initiatives, often pro- moted by food processors and retailers or individual farmers and local markets. There are relatively higher Sustainable Agriculture – From Common Principles to Common Practice 201