--- Page 97 ---

was not explicitly emphasized, despite the fact that this principle is the very foundation of any analysis of the sustainability of a system. The importance of the objective of consistency was highlighted recently by Cloquell-Ballester who proposed a methodology for validating the per- formance of indicators based on the work of Bockstaller and Girardin (2003) on indicator validation from three fundamental points of view: conceptual consistency, operational consistency and utility. Conceptual consistency determines the correct relation between the indicator and the measuring object (environmental/socio-territorial, economic).

Operational consistency determines the correct definition of the internal operations of the indicator (Cloquell-Ballester et al., 2006) which corre- spond respectively to design validation, output validation and end-use validation.

This explains its high frequency in the IDEA method (Table 1). Indeed, while intensive systems possess very great technical consistency, gener- ally turned towards the search for maximum yield in the short term,they often pollute and waste resources.It is therefore a different value system that pervades sustainable agriculture. This gives rise to another form of consistency, more global and more transversal, concerning the farmers not only in their function as agronomists and company chiefs but also on a personal level, as protagonists in society and as citizens.

As well as this, we must make the distinction between technical consis- tency and consistency in terms of “citizenship.” Technical consistency refers to a set of farming practices which,working together,amplify each other and produce effects that are greater than the sum of individual effects.For example,consistent cropping plans,rotations and operational sequences make it possible to combine profitability,quality of production and protection of the environment. As for consistency in terms of “citizen- ship,” this refers to socio-economic behaviour that enhances sustainable agricultural and rural development.It is therefore no longer specific to sus- tainable farming systems.

Second Stage: Build a matrix combining the target objectives with the indicators used to characterize them To move from the conceptual framework of the objectives to measuring achievement, the intermediate stage is to propose indicators intended to translate these objectives into measurable criteria. In this phase, it is useful to build a matrix including the objectives and indicators. The matrix of the IDEA method is constructed with 41 indicators providing information on 16 objectives.

Sustainable Agriculture – From Common Principles to Common Practice 84