--- Page 158 ---

sation and exhibit more insecticide resistance due to a more intensive use of pesticides. However, the farms assessed in this case study didn’t show problems regard- ing this pest. To save this comparative advantage it is important that they keep and even improve the biodiver- sity and good IPM practices (Boller et al., 2004a). – Fungicides containing copper should be replaced, e.g., by the available substitute Contaf (five per cent EC of Hexaconazole),which is assumed to be more environmen- tally friendly. – Ecologically valuable field margins are rare.Farmers should not only know that such border areas may provide habitats for pests. Rather, they should become aware about their potential as habitats for natural predators and, as a conse- quence,their importance as resources of natural regulation and buffer zones. If such zones were established, a more balanced and stable agro-ecological system could be installed, which may decrease the number of intervention measures required (Boller et al., 2004b).

Conclusion Tea can be considered a site-adapted crop to the region of the Nilgiris, Tamil Nadu, India, but in particular small farmers are under great eco- nomic pressure. For the ecological situation intervention points were identified for the improvement of pest management, nutrient manage- ment and biodiversity.The social situation of farm labour is clearly insuf- ficient due mainly to the very low salaries of employees,especially of tea pickers, resulting in a potential for social conflict. Efforts to improve this situation are urgent.

The RISE assessment showed that an increased and balanced tea yield per farm is possible without causing negative effects regarding sustain- ability.This could be obtained by optimizing fertilization and plant pro- tection. Irrigation might be an interesting option, but would need prior research on effects on water availability and on other possible negative side effects.Any measures have to be cautiously implemented and need agronomic advice and supervision. Increased productivity may lead to a win-win situation for processors, farmers and employees if a more regu- lar and higher income is being used to improve the situation for all stakeholders.To ensure this, a dialogue with the farmers, employees and Sustainable Agriculture – From Common Principles to Common Practice 145