--- Ecological Stratification Working Group, 1995, ---

monitoring, program evaluation and public reporting. Improvements will focus on three particular areas: ● work to enhance the methodology and data of existing indica- tors where necessary,and to develop new indicators to address key gaps; ● work to improve economic models and their linkages with environmental indicator models; and ● work to develop a capacity to understand and quantify the economic costs and benefits of environmental changes due to agriculture.

AAFC will continue its work to develop policy in priority areas important to sustainable development in agriculture (such as climate change poli- cy).Public reporting of agriculture’s environmental performance will also continue to be a priority for the department.

Bibliography Ecological Stratification Working Group, 1995, A National Ecological Framework for Canada.Report and National Map at 1:7,500,000 Scale.

Ottawa, ON: Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada and Environment Canada. Available at: http://sis.agr.gc.ca/cansis/publications/ecostrat/intro.html.

Eilers,W. and A. Lefebvre, 2005,“Assessing the Environmental Sustainability of Agriculture – Primary Agriculture,”in A. Lefebvre,W.

Eilers and B. Chunn (eds.), Environmental Sustainability of Canadian Agriculture: Agri-Environmental Indicator Report Series – Report #2, Ottawa, ON: Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada, pp. 7–13. Available at: www.agr.gc.ca/env/naharp-pnarsa.

Heigh L., B. Junkins, R. J. MacGregor, R. Gill, J. Heigh,T. Huffman, J.Yang, L. van Vliet, G. Padbury and M. Boehm, 2004, Quantitative Analysis of the Impact of Agricultural Management Strategies on Environmental Indicators. Ottawa, ON: Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada. Available at: www.agr.gc.ca/spb/rad-dra/publications/isie/ise_e.pdf.

Horner G. L., J. Corman, R. E. Howitt, C. A. Carter, and R. J. MacGregor, 1992, The Canadian Regional Agriculture Model Structure,Operation and Development. Ottawa: ON: Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada.

Sustainable Agriculture – From Common Principles to Common Practice 186