--- Page 101 ---

rule of key constraints which is called for in the dynamics of ecosystems.

Indeed, awarding an all-inclusive, single score would have no real mean- ing in that it would allow compensation between the results of the three scales (figure 2).

The question of the scale of values in the scoring system Any scoring system requires the construction of a value scale and a meaning in order to situate the score awarded and therefore character- ize the level of sustainability.

In the IDEA method,maximum marks translate the weight attributed to each indicator within the component to which it relates and, consequently, the weight attributed to each field in the sustainability scales in question. The maximum score awarded to each indicator is defined not with the aim of establishing an absolute optimal value,but rather practices,behaviour or lev- els of results that do not give rise to fundamental remarks concerning the notion of sustainability. Once tests had been conducted, the scoring scales are calibrated to achieve the greatest possible discrimination between farms.

However, for certain indicators, negative scores are allocated, highlight- ing critical situations in relation to sustainability. For example, the use of phyto-sanitary products of class seven,2 zero grazing or straw burning cause elementary sustainability points to be lost and can lead to nega- tive scores in the absence of factors to compensate for them.

Fourth Stage: Develop the content of the three scales, organize consistency within each scale and describe the construction of each indicator in detail In this stage, the respective content of the three sustainability scales (agro-ecological, socio-territorial and economic scales) is formalized and organized to give them a meaning.

In the IDEA method, each sustainability scale is subdivided into three or four components which summarize the major fundamental characteris- tics of the sustainability diagnostic assessment (Tables 2,3 and 4).A total of 41 indicators are proposed.Most are composite indicators established on the basis of easily quantifiable magnitudes, but there are also a few cases of more qualitative data. 2 Article 13 of Regulation n°1782/2003 of 29 September 2003 setting out the common rules for the CAP support system, OJEC of 21.10.2003, L 270.

Sustainable Agriculture – From Common Principles to Common Practice 88