--- Page 111 ---

As presented in the second part, the higher the score, the more sustain- able the farm is considered as being in terms of the scale in considera- tion.

Figure 6 shows that farmers have fertilization practices with scores vary- ing between zero and 12 (extreme values for this indicator) and pesti- cide practices scoring between zero and seven. Detailed analysis of this data involves searching for the reasons for differences in the results,seek- ing to understand what technical reasoning (or what behaviour) led to this result and thereby identifying possible ways of progressing.Such an analysis can be made indicator by indicator and can identify one or sev- eral particularly interesting farms. For example, the results of farm 11 show that its farming practices are an excellent example of an integrated arable farming system: long rotation, weed control by a combination of mechanical and chemical means, limited used of pesticides and rational use of fertilizers etc. ■ The method challenges certain notions regarding the cost of pro- tecting the environment Viaux et al. (2003) showed that by grouping together a large amount of farming data, it is possible to clarify certain general ideas on sustainabil- ity. We have seen, in certain graphs, that there seems to be a form of opposition between agro-ecological sustainability and economic sus- tainability, such as on farms two, five and nine in the St. Jean d’Angély group (Figure 4). In fact, this point is often raised as evidence that sus- tainability is utopian. In fact, if all the data from the farms is analyzed closely,it can be seen that there is no correlation between these two sus- tainability scales. This is highlighted in Figure 7, in which the farms are classified in decreasing order of economic sustainability.Agro-ecological and economic sustainability are independent of each other. It is there- fore possible to achieve good economic sustainability while preserving the environment. This observation is backed up by analysis of the rela- tion between the C1 economic viability indicator and the all-round score on the agro-ecological sustainability scale,which again shows that there is no relation between the two. This type of analysis is also capable of identifying the farmers who succeed in reconciling these three aspects of sustainability and who can serve as pedagogical examples for group work.

Sustainable Agriculture – From Common Principles to Common Practice 98