--- tea production, India,Tamil Nadu, RISE. ---

able information relevant for the managerial decisions of Indian tea pro- ducers and processors as well as stakeholders like employees, con- sumers and the general public alike.

Keywords: Sustainable agriculture, holistic sustainability assessment, sustainability assessment tool, case study on sustainability, sustainable tea production, India,Tamil Nadu, RISE.

Background The liberalization and globalization of markets exert great pressure on economic aspects of agricultural production by causing generally decreasing and highly volatile commodity prices, which render many farms and even entire sectors unprofitable (Worldwatch Institute, 2003).

The financial pressure on salaries (World Bank, 2003) and expected returns on investment can lead to social and ecological dumping. This may result in discrimination, child labour and failure to provide necessi- ties like potable water, hygiene or protection from hazardous sub- stances.This may also trigger the loss of biodiversity, soil degradation, or the contamination of soil, water and air (WWF, 2002; Baratta, 2004).

In this context, it is important that the sustainability of agricultural pro- duction can be assessed and monitored in all three dimensions (ecolog- ically, economically and socio-culturally). A simple and inexpensive but still holistic management tool that allows for the pinpointing of poten- tial measures to improve the situation and initiate a response against potential risks and bottlenecks in agricultural systems is, therefore, of great value for farm managers and other relevant entities.

With this objective the Response-Inducing Sustainability Evaluation (RISE) has been developed at the Swiss College of Agriculture (Häni et al.,2002,2003a, 2003b;Studer et al.,2006) in cooperation with public and private entities.

RISE basics The assessment tool RISE (Response-Inducing Sustainability Evaluation) can be used globally for the analysis and comparison of all kinds of farms and production systems. In the development of the tool, emphasis was placed on simplicity and meaningful outputs. A balance between the straightforwardness of the analysis, the complexity of the reality and the transparency of the results shall make the output comprehensible for a Sustainable Agriculture – From Common Principles to Common Practice 123