--- When to Start the Business Planning Process ---

www.SARE.org 3 mentors. Other helpful advisors include local Extension specialists and staff from various USDA agencies, such as the Natural Resources Conservation Service, Rural Development, and the Farm Service Agency.

Disagreements about major decisions–such as what crop to plant, how to market an item or where to invest time or money–can lead to serious conflicts that prevent the farm business from succeeding. But when you include everybody in the planning process, together you can see how each person’s goals fit into the overall goals of the farm. You can also include each person’s values in the overall vision and long-term direction of the farm. This will help to: • Make everybody feel more invested in the business • Put each person’s skills to their best use • Reduce the risk of conflict down the line When a disagreement does arise, identify a neutral party who can act as a mediator. Everybody involved in the disagreement should agree on who the mediator will be, and this person should have experience in conflict resolution. Even without disagreement, a trusted mentor or advisor can help you navigate the parts of the planning process you may find difficult.

When to Start the Business Planning Process Certainly, if you’re a beginning farmer or an experi- enced one who doesn’t already have a business plan, now is a good time to create one! It’s useful for every farmer to go through the planning process when thinking about making a major change to your operation, or if you have a critical problem you’d like to address.

Also, business planning is not a one-time activity.

In general, it’s good to revisit your business plan every one or two years. Use this time to reexamine your goals or to see if the plan needs updating due to recent events that took place within or outside of your business. You’ll also see in our discus- sion of planning task 5 later in this publication that it’s important to have a system for monitoring your plan.

Planning basically means putting your ideas into action, and a monitoring system allows you to see if your ideas are working.

Many things can happen, both good and bad, that can trigger the need to update your farm’s business plan. Just a few examples: • Somebody who is deeply involved in the farm needs to cut back on their time for personal reasons, for example because they’ve had a baby or a parent’s health is declining • An experienced, trusted manager is leaving to start a farm of their own • A child who has been helping out is going off to college and may not return to the farm • A new marketing opportunity appears in your area • An enterprise has been very successful and you’re thinking about expanding it • Natural disasters or extreme weather are hitting your farm particularly hard How to Create a Business Plan Your business plan should be a roadmap to managing your farm or ranch so that all its parts flow smoothly.

In the following sections, we’ll summarize the five tasks of business planning. These tasks are presented in greater detail in the workbook Building a Sustainable Business (www.sare.org/business). When you’re ready to dive in, use the information and worksheets in Building a Sustainable Business to complete each task.

Business planning can be a time consuming process, but it will help you achieve your goals. Photo by Kirsten Strough, USDA