--- Vision, Mission and Goals ---

www.SARE.org 5 your community, your markets, your industry as a whole, the environment, etc.

Next, you’ll need to go into detail describing your current situation in four key areas. At a glance, the topics you’ll address include: • Marketing: products, customers, distribution, pricing and promotional activities • Operations: physical resources, production systems and management systems • Human resources: employees and their skills, experience and roles • Finances: personal living expenses, past business performance, current financial position and risk exposure Task 3:

Vision, Mission and Goals NOW IT’S TIME TO IMAGINE THE FUTURE FOR YOUR farm business and to set short- and long-term goals for reaching your vision. It’s important to include all the key members of your planning team in each step in this task. As with values, you can easily find differences in each person’s vision and long-term goals for the farm, along with shared ideas. Taking each person’s values, vision and goals into account is important to the success of the planning process and business management.

Planning task 3 in Building a Sustainable Business (pg. 87) includes worksheets with prompts that can help you turn your ideas into clear statements of vision, mission and goals. There are also real-farm examples to further guide you.

Vision The first step in this task is to describe your vision for the future of both your farm business and the people involved with it. At this point it helps to revisit the values you laid out in task 1 because your vision should reflect your most important values. To get yourself thinking about a vision for the next five, 10 or 20 years, consider questions like: • What will your farm look like in the future? • What will you be producing? • Who will be working there and in what roles? • What will the landscape look like? • How will your farm fit into nearby communities? • How much will you earn from the farm business? • What will your quality of life be?

Mission Statement After writing down your vision, the next step is to develop a mission statement. The mission statement is a description of your farm and its guiding princi- ples, and it draws on your values, current situation Use the worksheets in planning task 2 of Building a Sustainable Business to guide you through the information you’ll need to collect for each of these business areas.

After you’ve reviewed your history and current situation, you’ll be ready to prepare a SWOT analysis (strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, threats). A SWOT analysis identifies your farm’s internal strengths and weaknesses, and its external oppor- tunities and threats. As you move forward with the planning process, you should look for ways to combine information in your SWOT analysis. For example, see how you can use your farm’s strengths to overcome its weaknesses and how you can use external opportunities to address threats.

The business strategies you develop later in the planning process should align with your vision for where you want to be in the future. Photo by Lance Cheung, USDA