--- consultations. Northwind Nursery and Orchard owner Frank Foltz, for instance, ---

Similarly, if you plan to process or offer a service, the systems component of your plan might address your business’ strategy for workshops or on-farm consultations. Northwind Nursery and Orchard owner Frank Foltz, for instance, took time to describe his operation management plans for farm tours and pruning demonstrations.

There are many resources that describe traditional and, increasingly, alternative production systems. Most universities have published research studies on reduced input, organic and livestock grazing systems. Two excellent publications are the Grazing Systems Planning Guide and Making the Transition to Sustainable Farming (see “Resources”). Most importantly, talk with other farmers—learn from their mistakes and their successes.

Production schedule. Once you have identified one or more production system strategies, think about how management within each system may change over time (e.g., from season to season or from year to year. For instance, how might your livestock management change as you transition from a system of confined farrowing to pasture farrowing for hogs, or from summer grazing to winter feeding for cattle if you plan to seasonally graze? Similarly, think about your annual crop rotation schedule, weekly vegetable harvesting schedule, or daily farm tour schedule. This type of detailed operations planning is critical for any business—it can help you estimate physical and labor resource needs and production potential, as well as cash flow projections. And in many cases, detailed production schedules may be necessary for institutional compliance.

Crop producer Mabel Brelje, for example, is required to submit a crop rotation plan annually in order to obtain organic certification. For this reason, she included a rotation map in her final business plan (Figure 60).

Similarly, Dave and Florence Minar included a proposed processing schedule in their final business plan to communicate financial needs and performance to their lender: “We plan to process and sell 30 percent of the milk produced on our farm the first year. Processing will then be increased by five percent each month until May 2004 when all of our milk will be processed.” The Minars also developed a detailed product processing Figure 60.

Mabel Brelje’s Five- Year Crop Rotation Plan 4 TASK 136 BUILDING A SUSTAINABLE BUSINESS .......