--- Develop a Business Strategy ---

You’ll work through this Human Resources section of Developing a
Business Strategy by working through the following aspects of Human
Resources in the order shown below.
You will begin your research by determining
projected labor needs for each enterprise
(product). Next, you will compare your projected
labor needs against current labor resources to
identify any gaps, as you did in the operations
section for physical resources. You and your
planning team will then need to consider
how to fill those gaps and to identify one or
more strategies for doing so. Finally, you will
develop a strategy for managing labor and the
business. This is perhaps one of the most critical
components of your business strategy. Without
an effective management plan or business
manager, even the best of business plans can
fall apart. Take your time developing a human
resources management strategy—it will be one
of your keys to success.
Labor Needs: What are our future workforce needs?
Begin building your human resources strategy with some critical thinking
about the type of work and accompanying workloads that will be necessary
to reach your future vision and to carry out the marketing-, operations- and
finance-related work within the business.
Tasks. What new marketing-, operations- and finance-related tasks will be
required to produce and market a new product or to implement and manage
a new production system? Be realistic about your labor needs and consider
the not-so-obvious elements of business ownership and management, such as
time required to communicate with staff, make equipment repairs, and handle
administrative needs. For example, if you are considering organic production,
be sure to plan ample time for record keeping. The paperwork necessary to
track inputs, harvest and storage in an organic system can be tedious and time
consuming.
“Many organic producers consider the organic premium to be primarily a
payment for the extra administrative efforts required by credible certification
agencies,” notes certification specialist Lisa Gulbranson. “The audit trail for a
certified organic product must be maintained with great detail.”45
4
TASK
146
BUILDING A SUSTAINABLE BUSINESS
45Organic Certification of Crop Production in
Minnesota, Gulbranson, 2001 (revised).
4Develop a Business Strategy
;Human Resources Strategy
Labor Needs

Tasks

Workload
Skills
Labor Gaps
Compensation
Management and Communications
Develop a Strategic Human

Resources Plan
.......