--- The Full Circle of the ---

help you track changes in wildlife populations, plant species and hours on the job. It’s up to you to decide what records to keep depending on the type of management feedback you require.

Designate a file, box or log book in which to maintain your records. Manual and computerized record-keeping tools are described in the “Resources” section to help you with this task. Next, assign someone the task of record keeping and designate a time to regularly review your records. The information contained in your records will be meaningful only if it is maintained and put to use. If you need help getting organized or maintaining records, consider joining a farm management association or farm business education class. You might also hire a consultant or tap into the experience of another business owner.

Review Progress.

Finally, you may want to develop a written monitoring schedule that outlines when you will review your plan and checkpoints with planning team members—once per month or season? During a slow time of the year? At a regularly scheduled family retreat? Arrange a time when planning team members can meet to discuss what about the business has been successful and what has not using your critical success factors, goals and financial projections or ratios as guides.

If you were unsuccessful in some areas or in terms of several objectives, try to understand why.

Ask whether or not circumstances have changed within the business or externally in the industry and market, or if your initial projections were unrealistic. Use both your successes and failures to learn more about your business. Time brings experience and makes you wiser about your business and the industry. For example, after a year, you may have a better sense of market prices or production potential.

Always remember to adjust your prices and output projections as you gain experience.

Next, take time to re-evaluate your business plan. You’ve come full circle in the planning process. Review your goals, take stock of the business’ current resources and competitive environment, and make strategy adjustments if necessary. Then you’re ready to develop new checkpoints for your next season/ year in business. 5 TASK 242 BUILDING A SUSTAINABLE BUSINESS The Full Circle of the Business Planning Process Identify values Review current situation Draft vision, mission, goals Research, develop, and evaluate business strategy Implement and monitor business plan