--- Identify Your Own Values ---

“Because our health is directly tied to the health of the environment, we strive to produce healthy dairy and meat products by utilizing sustainable methods in their production. . . . We put all of our land in permanent pasture grasses to let the cows harvest their own feed and to stop erosion. This can also improve animal health as well as the water and mineral cycles. . . . Our community values the esthetic beauty of seeing farm animals on the land.” Similarly, the values identified by Greg Reynolds of Riverbend Farm had a big impact on his choice of production system. Greg believes that agriculture should be both labor and knowledge intensive, thus “involving more people in production agriculture to create a healthy rural economy.” These values or beliefs have led him toward the establishment of a labor-intensive organic vegetable business.

Value identification becomes critically important if you are planning collec tively with other business stakeholders such as family, formal partners and community members. Awareness of the different values held by each planning team member will make goal setting and conflict resolution easier down the road. A clear understanding of core values can help expose the personal biases that you have and make it easier to come to more objective business decisions.

You may ultimately decide to share your values with future stakeholders as they join your business or hold on to them privately to serve as internal yardsticks throughout the business planning process.

Identify Your Own Values Take time now to explore your own values. Begin by asking yourself and members of your planning team what being “successful” means or recall a critical turning point in your life when you were faced with a serious tradeoff.

What values guided you?

Which of the following statements ring true for you?

To me, being “successful” in farming means: • Paying down our expenses. • Putting money away for the future. • Farming full time. • Taking pride in the products we produce. • Creating a place for the next generation to farm. • Taking time to rest, vacation. • Being able to save for down times. • Having a surplus to share with others in need. • Working together as a family. 1 TASK 20 BUILDING A SUSTAINABLE BUSINESS See pages 24–25 for a complete set of blank worksheets for Task One. ; To print a complete set of blank worksheets, go to http://purl.umn.edu/115840