--- The Appendices to the Minars’ Business Plan (Project Cost Budget, Five Year Cash Flow Plan, Financial Analysis of ---

Operations Our dairy herd size will remain at about 150 cows, as this is all our land base will allow. We hope to start building construction by late summer and have it completed by Oct. 31, 2000. We will purchase used equipment for the plant if possible. We hope to have all the equipment installed by Dec. 15, 2001. We hope to begin milk processing by Dec. 30, 2001.

The milk will be hauled to the plant with a bulk tank trailer and pumped into a raw milk storage tank.

It will then move to a batch pasteurizer and be pasteurized. Next it will be separated into skim milk and cream, and then some cream will be added back to make the assorted milk products. The rest of the cream will be made into ice cream and butter. The buttermilk from the butter will be mixed with chocolate or cultured and bottled as buttermilk. We plan to process three days a week.

Our retail store will be open according to our customers’ demand. We will have a cooler outside with dairy products to be bought on the honor system, and we will have a drive-up window so parents will not have to leave their car.

We will purchase a refrigerated delivery truck by June 1, 2001. This will be used for meat and dairy product deliveries. Home delivery routes, drop-off sites, restaurants and food co-op schedules will be established by Dec. 1, 2001. Our billing system will be developed by Dec. 1, 2001.

We plan to build a kiosk and have it operational by the summer of 2002, for the sale of ice cream cones. This kiosk will travel to town celebrations and fairs as a moneymaker and an advertisement for our products. This would possibly be a good place for Dan to put his business schooling to use. Hopefully, it will be a place for our grandchildren to make some money in the summer, when they are older and learn to work together.

Financing We plan to borrow money to build and equip our proposed milk processing plant and retail center. We also need operating capital to finance our operation for the first two years. __________________ The Appendices to the Minars’ Business Plan (Project Cost Budget, Five Year Cash Flow Plan, Financial Analysis of Current Operation: 1998-2000, Tax Statements from Current Operation: 1998-2000, and Resumes for Management Team Members) have not been included for confidentiality reasons.

Appendices 272 BUILDING A SUSTAINABLE BUSINESS