--- Term Debt Coverage Ratio: ---

Worksheet 2.15 Financial Ratios Based on the Balance Sheet and Income Statement Term Debt Coverage Ratio:

This measure of repayment capacity indicates whether your business is generating enough income to make principal and interest payments on intermediate and long term debt.

Gross Farm Income (Income Statement) Cash Operating Expenses (Income Statement) – Scheduled Interest Payments on Intermediate and Long-term Debt (Income Statement) + Family Living Expenses and Taxes (from the Earned Net Worth Change Worksheet) – Funds Available for Debt Payments = Intermediate and Long-term Debt Payments ÷ Term Debt Coverage Ratio = A term debt coverage ratio of over 150%, meaning that you are producing $1.50 of income that is available for debt repayment for each $1.00 of scheduled debt repayment, is usually considered adequate.

Operating Expense Ratio:

This measure of overall efficiency indicates the percentage of business revenues that are available for family living expenses, debt repayment and new investments.

Cash Operating Expenses (Income Statement) Interest Expense (Income Statement) – Gross Farm Income (Income Statement) ÷ Operating Expense Ratio = While thumb rules for the ratios listed above can be used across farm types and across industries, operating expens- es will vary substantially from business to business and industry to industry. As a general guideline, most farm busi- ness strive to keep operating expenses under 70% of gross revenues. If you are operating a small farm that employs sustainable practices, your financial success probably depends on operating efficiency. In that case, you should proba- bly strive to keep operating expenses below 60% of revenues. If you are involved in a retail business, sales volume might be more important to your bottom line than operating expense levels if cost of goods sold is included. In that case, a much higher operating expense ratio might be expected. So, this ratio is useful for internal tracking of your business, but not very useful for comparisons with other businesses.

CONTINUED 2 TASK 83 BUILDING A SUSTAINABLE BUSINESS