--- Analyzing Land Investments ---

Outside equity. Most agricultural corporations are still family farms today. Using external equity capital has traditionally been a very unusual method of financing agricultural activities. More recently, however, there have been a number of creative approaches to attracting external capital. Often these business structures have been similar to networking, with a group of producers creating a business structure, such as a cooperative, to give them some sort of competitive advantage. Equity contributions from outside of agriculture are usually somewhat limited by corporate farming laws. Some states now allow the formation of agricultural Limited Liability Companies (LLCs) that offer some of the benefits of outside equity contributions while limiting the liability of the investor for the legal obligations of the business. If you are interested in these options, do some further research.

Retained earnings. Another way to finance your business that you are probably already using is retained earnings.

You may not be consciously thinking about it, but most small businesses continually inject their earnings back into the operation. Of course this requires that there be earnings remaining after all costs and owner withdrawals.

Using equity capital, either from farm or nonfarm earnings, to finance your business will gain you ownership with a great degree of control. The cost of equity capital is the return it could have earned in an alternative investment.

The risk of using equity capital is that you could lose your equity if the business fails. So you might want to consider a balanced strategy that invests at least some of your earnings outside of the farm business.

Shared ownership. Experts will usually tell you that there is too much capital invested in production agriculture.

One way to reduce your ownership cost may be to share ownership of expensive equipment that is only used for short portions of a year with a neighbor or someone else.

Shared ownership gives you reduced control, but at half or less of the cost. Timing concerns usually limit the use of this option. One of the more creative solutions that is being used to some degree today is to share ownership with someone who farms in another part of the country where the cropping season is different. Again, you may be able to think outside the box and come up with a creative shared ownership strategy. Whenever shared ownership is used, you should put the agreement in writing to avoid future disputes.

Strategic alliances/networking. This may be a way of gaining control of some needs of your operation without having to own them. You may be able to gain access to a specific input into your production process by either investing in someone else’s operation or by contracting with that operator. While the most visible use of networking in agriculture has been in large pork production operations, you may be able to think of ways to network with other operators or suppliers that are not as grand. Businesses have long relied on alliances and joint ventures to reduce individual costs or to guarantee access to inputs or markets. Such reliance on relationships may be vital to the sustainability of both parties. 4 TASK 161 BUILDING A SUSTAINABLE BUSINESS investments typically account for the largest farm expense and have the potential to make or break your business. If your business’ operations strategy necessitates land and building acquisition, be sure to thoroughly review your financing options with a lender, accountant, or attorney. If you decide to invest in land, you need to consider market price, the value of the land to you, financial feasibility, and the risk to cash flow. Complete Worksheet 4.26: Farmland Affordability to determine the maximum financially feasible price you should pay for land. You can view Analyzing Land Investments by Gayle S. Willett for additional suggestions and information (see “Resources”).

As a beginning or young farmer, choosing a financial strategy and financing alternatives may seem intimidating, especially if you haven’t had the chance to build a credit history or an asset base. Several well-known funding sources for beginning farmers are listed in Figure 81. As you review these finance sources, don’t ignore