--- Financial Needs: What are our current ---

Financial Situation Detailed information on current finances is a key component of any business plan, particularly if it will be used to generate outside resources in the form of loans or equity investments. While many of your personal goals cannot be expressed in monetary terms, a certain level of financial planning is necessary for a farm operation to be viable in the long term. An accurate assessment of your current financial situation provides a comprehensive summary of the value of the physical resources available to your operation. It also shows you the income being generated by those resources in combination with human resources through your operations and marketing strategies. In addition, the strength of your financial position will determine your ability to access the capital resources you will need to add and use new resources in your operation.

Your assessment of your farm’s financial resources should answer the following questions: • Financial needs: What are our current family living expenses? • Financial performance: How well has our business performed in the past, and how strong is our current financial position? • Risk: What type of risk is our business currently exposed to? • Financial environment: What is our current business environment, and how is it changing?

Use Worksheets 2.11 through 2.15 as a guide for recording your answers as you work through this section.

Financial Needs: What are our current family living expenses?

If you and your family rely on your farm business as your only source of income, or as a major source of income that is supplemented by earnings from off-farm work, your operation can only be sustainable in the long run if it provides enough income to meet your family’s basic living expenses. For most people, then, making a realistic estimate of current family living expenses is the starting point for assessing the financial status of your current operation.

Use Worksheet 2.11: Estimating Family Living Expenses and Income Needs to estimate your annual family living expenses and your family’s earnings from off-farm work. The difference between the two is the amount of income you need from your farm operation.

If you do not maintain current records that can be used to estimate your family’s current and future living expenses, you may want to contact Minnesota’s Center for Farm Financial Management (CFFM). The CFFM maintains a database, called FINBIN, which tracks personal and household expenses for thousands of Minnesota and North Dakota farm families. Average Minnesota household 2 TASK 51 BUILDING A SUSTAINABLE BUSINESS .......

The Four Key Management Areas: • Marketing • Operations • Human Resources ; Finance