--- Competition: Who are ---

Competition: Who are our competitors and how will we position ourselves?

Nearly every business or product has competition of some kind. Find out who your competitors are and what they offer to customers. A trip to the local grocery store, farmers’ market, or even a bit of time on the Internet to research how many growers offer organic asparagus or specialty grains may be all that is needed. Is anyone else serving your target market?

If so, find out everything you can about their business or their buyers. You might even consider contacting them. Try to find out how they market and price, and, if possible, get a feeling for their cost structure. You need to determine what share of the market you can realistically capture.

Dave and Florence Minar made phone calls to other home delivery services and visited local retailers when beginning their research. They found that “No farmer in our area is processing and selling his own dairy products. Sources of competition for home- delivered milk into New Prague are Meyer Bros. and Schwans. Meyer Bros. buys milk off the open market and resells it—they do not purchase milk locally or offer non-homogenized products. Schwans will affect us only with ice cream. Some of our competitors in the metro area cooperative groceries are Schroeders, Organic Valley and MOM’s.” Use Worksheet 4.4: Competition to analyze the competition that exists for each of the products you plan to offer. List your competitors. Then, consider where you have an advantage over them. Can you produce at a lower cost? Do you have access to Worksheet 4.4 Complete this Worksheet for each major product you plan to produce. List your competitors in each market segment for this product. Describe competitors’ product marketing strategies and the prices they charge for each product. Note any advantages and disadvantages you may have with respect to your competition.Then, develop and describe your strategy for competing or positioning your business in the marketplace.

Competition Product:

Customer Segment: 1 2 3 Competitor names Competitor products Major characteristics Product price range Our advantages Our disadvantages Competition strategy:

Bottled Milk Home Delivery Meyer Brothers, Schwans Whole milk, 2%, skim, ice- cream Homogenized milk; wide distribution $1.99 - $2.10/gallon + delivery charge Locally based; just as much local name recogni- tion; superior product Lack of customer and deli- very knowledge; logistics Retail Intermediaries MOM’s, Organic Valley, Horizon, Kemps Whole, 2%, and skim milk Organic, homogenized and non-homogenized; paper and plastic cartons; some pasturing of cows; MOM’s and Organic Valley produced in Minnesota and Wisconsin Range for organic: 1/2 gallons = $ 3.09 - $3.29; Kemps: 1/2 gallon = $1.99 Non-homogenized; locally produced; pastured cows Not certified organic; no name recognition We will compete by offering a high quality, moderately priced product. It is a common perception that milk in glass bottles stays colder, tastes better, is of higher quality, and has a nostalgic appeal to many cus- tomers. We will dominate this market for a number of years in this area by being the first dairy to process on-farm and to use glass bottles for milk from grass-fed cows. 4 TASK 114 BUILDING A SUSTAINABLE BUSINESS Figure 42.

Example from Cedar Summit Farm—Worksheet 4.4:  Competition