--- The Long Boom ---

We have made an effort to keep a good relationship with our bank. We bring a budget and operating statement to our banker early in the year. The competition among our local banks for our business has allowed us to borrow money at a very low interest rate.

Our net farm income in 1999 was $xxx,xxx. The rate of return on farm assets was 14% and the rate of return on farm equity was 24.6%.

Vision The future looks bright! Cedar Summit Farm is still a diversified livestock enterprise after ten years. We have listened to our customers and have adjusted our product line to suit their needs. All of our products are sold at our farm store, farmers’ markets, CSAs, church drop-off spots, food co-ops or delivered to homes and restaurants within a 25-mile radius of the farm. Included in our product line are a large variety of dairy and meat products. The customer base at Cedar Summit Farm has grown to the point that we must ally with neighboring sustainable producers. The fact that the farm is almost totally surrounded by homes has played a part in this growth.

Goals Our goal is to build a small milk processing plant and retail center, with a drive-up window, on our farm. This building will be built on our property near the intersection of Scott Co. roads 2 and 15.

We must obtain a conditional use permit and secure financing. A brochure detailing our proposed milk processing plant and retail center will be published by June 1, 2000. This will be for county and township officials and neighbors informing them of our plans. Cedar Summit Farm will process and retail all of our dairy products to local customers (25-mile radius) within 5 years, and continue to expand our local meat business.

Cedar Summit Farm will provide full or part-time employment to any family member who desires to work in the family business. It is our desire to provide educational opportunities and benefits such as health insurance and a 401K plan.

We will market products that we feel good about, and distribute them locally when possible. Excess product will be donated to food shelves. We will package and market our products in the most economical and environmentally sound way possible.

Cedar Summit Farm will produce extra value products that will enhance the local economy, purchase supplies locally as much as possible, and take pride in a superior product.

Marketing The marketing book The Long Boom by Schwartz, Leyden and Hyatt, says that people like the power that choice gives them. The more standardized and homogenized our food becomes, the more it makes us crave the unusual and non-commonplace. They also say that 10 percent of the market would be made up of people seeking a radically different product. Our grass-fed cows do produce a different product. Grass- fed cows produce higher amounts of Omega-3 and conjugated linoleic acid in their meat and milk then Appendices 269 BUILDING A SUSTAINABLE BUSINESS