--- Unique Features: What are the unique features ---

Once you have a basic description of the market or markets you currently serve, you’ll need to gather more detailed information on the segmentation, size and scope of your market, as well as who is already serving the market. Are there distinct segments in your customer base—for example, households and businesses? How many potential customers are there in each segment in the area you serve? How many customers do you have in each segment and how much do they buy? Use the “Markets Served” section of Worksheet 2.2 to answer these basic questions for each of the markets you serve. This will help you identify the most attractive market opportunities.

Dave and Florence Minar identified two distinct market segments in their current market assessment for their meat products (Figure 6). The first segment is on-farm sales. They had about 400 customers in this segment, and in 2000 they had total sales of approximately $43,600. This implies annual sales per customer of $109. The second market segment was the New Prague Farmers’ Market. Dave and Florence estimated that they have approximately 25 customers in this segment. Their sales volume for this segment was $1,500, or $60 per customer.

It’s not unusual to have some question marks in this segment of the Worksheet, as the Minars do. These point to areas where it may be important to gather information as you begin to look ahead to expanding sales within a particular segment or to entering a new market segment.

Unique Features: What are the unique features that distinguish our products?

Unique characteristics differentiate your product and make it more attrac tive to your customers. For example, Riverbend Farm owner Greg Reynolds’ vegetables are known by restaurant owners and food cooperative produce buyers for freshness and high quality. As a result, these customers prefer to buy from Riverbend Farm whenever possible. Similarly, the milk Dave and Florence Minar produce is unique because their cows are pasture-fed. Many consumers who have tried graziers’ milk prefer the taste, and there is some evidence that it may have health benefits that are not present in conventional milk. Some consumers also prefer graziers’ milk because they want to support and encour age this production method. When Dave and Florence Minar began the business planning process in 1998, they recognized these distinctive features of the milk they produced, but were unable to capitalize on these differences since they sold it to a cooperative where it was blended with milk from other farms.

Dave and Florence identified two distinguishing features of their meat products—the animals are grass-fed and locally produced. These characteristics appeal to their retail customers in both market segments. The grass-fed 2 TASK 33 BUILDING A SUSTAINABLE BUSINESS Products are defined as commodities, final consumer goods, and services. ........