--- Move on to Planning Task Five—Present, Implement, and Monitor Your ---

Worksheet 4.40 Use the space below to draft an executive summary for your business plan. Remember, this is perhaps the most important section of your plan—it should provide a snapshot of what the business is about and how it will be successful.At the very least, your executive summary should communicate information about goals, market potential and sales volume, production management and capacity, expenses, profitability, cash flow and risk management.

Executive Summary Cedar Summit Farm will build a milk processing plant as a natural extension of our dairy business. We are located just north of New Prague and within 25 miles of the Minneapolis-St. Paul area including the suburbs of Edina, Minnetonka, Eden Prairie, Burnsville and Apple Valley. By capturing more of the consumer dollar we can afford to bring our farm-oriented children into the business. We feel that our grass-fed cows produce a superior product that has much value to the health conscious. We value producer to consumer relationships.

The past few years that we have direct marketed our meat products have shown us that consumers value knowing where their food comes from. This past spring we sent out 450 brochures to past customers.

We will distribute our products from delivery trucks and a storefront with a drive up window that will be part of our processing plant. Our distribution will be home delivery, drop off sites at churches, co-op food stores, and restaurants that cater to locally produced food. The plant and store will be located near the intersection of Scott Co. roads 2 and 15.

We plan to process and sell 30 percent of the milk produced on our farm the first year. Processing will then be increased by five percent each month, until May 2004, when all our milk will be processed. Until we reach capacity, milk not processed in our plant will continue to be sold to Davisco of Le Sueur, MN., which has agreed to buy it at grade A prices.

Cedar Summit Farm will build the plant and lease it to Cedar Summit Creamery, LLC. Cedar Summit Creamery, LLC, will purchase all the necessary equipment and supplies for operation, and be responsible for production, marketing and distribution. According to the requirements in this business plan, and based on what we feel are sound business assumptions, our initial capital requirements are for: (1) Cedar Summit Farm -- $XXX,000 for a 4,800 square foot concrete block building, with all infrastructures in place. (2) Cedar Summit Creamery LLC -- $XXX,000 for the purchase of supplies and start-up costs.

We do not anticipate additional investment requirements. We will plan our growth through retained earnings.

We have children with many abilities and envision this business as a future for them and their families, and a valued asset to our community.

Use Worksheet 4.40: Executive Summary to draft an executive summary for your business plan. With an executive summary in hand, you’re ready to write the rest of your plan!

Move on to Planning Task Five—Present, Implement, and Monitor Your Business Plan!

Figure 98.

Example from Cedar Summit Farm— Worksheet 4.40:

Executive Summary 4 TASK 185 BUILDING A SUSTAINABLE BUSINESS