--- Developing a Balance Sheet ---

if your balance sheets have been based strictly on market values, realize that not all of your net worth changes may have resulted from business earnings.

Moreover, because farms and ranches typically are owner operated, it can be difficult to separate personal and business assets. If your business is a sole proprietorship and you have included nonfarm information on your balance sheet (like Dave and Florence Minar), be aware that net worth changes over time will reflect what was earned on and off the farm minus what was consumed in family living and taxes.

Use Worksheet 2.13 to reconstruct historical balance sheets for your business if possible. Divide your assets and liabilities into current (cash and other assets that are easily converted to cash or liabilities due within the current period), intermediate and long-term categories (items not normally for sale, but rather held for the production of livestock or crops and liabilities due beyond the current period). Then value your assets and liabilities using either the cost or market valuation method. Add assets and liabilities in the space provided and calculate your net worth.

For more information about balance sheets and how to construct them, see Developing a Balance Sheet from Oklahoma State University. You may also want to check out the FINPACK or Farm Biz computer software, which can walk you through the balance sheet input and provide the beginnings of computerized analysis for the farm business. See “Resources” for more information.

Once you’ve prepared historical balance sheets and income statements, your next task is to look at the value of retained earnings generated by the business if one of your goals is to increase owner equity over time. Retained earnings can be estimated using the earned net worth change calculation. The earned net worth change is calculated by adding all nonfarm income to net farm income. Family living expenses, partner withdrawals and taxes are then subtracted to arrive at a value that represents income that either contributed to or depleted the farm’s net worth in the given period. This simple calculation is depicted in Figure 25, Worksheet 2.14: Earned Net Worth Change Analysis.

Note that for family farms, the earned net worth calculation includes non- farm components since the nonfarm withdrawals for family living purposes are the primary draw on income and because net worth growth can occur by Worksheet 2.14 Use this worksheet to calculate your overall change in wealth earned from farm and nonfarm income after adjusting for living expenses and partner withdrawals.

Earned Net Worth Change Analysis For the period beginning and ending Net Farm Income Nonfarm Income + Family Living/Partner Withdrawals – Income Taxes – Earned Net Worth Change = 1/1/2000 12/31/2000 65,083 30, 000 48,129 7,222 39,762 2 TASK 57 BUILDING A SUSTAINABLE BUSINESS Figure 25.

Example from Cedar Summit Farm—Worksheet 2.14:  Earned Net Worth Change Analysis SOME NUMBERS HAVE BEEN CHANGED TO PROTECT CONFIDENTIALITY. .......