--- Write Out Goals. ---

may be a little more general and personal in nature like those drafted by organic wheat producer Mabel Brelje: “Prior to 1998, my short-term goal was to convert my farm to organic standard, which has been accomplished. Currently, my short-term goals include sharecropping to overcome ongoing labor and equipment deficiencies while working toward my longer term goal—to sell the farm to a family or organization who will continue to manage it organically and maintain it as a showplace . . . Once the farm sale is complete, I intend to remain active as a consultant and to pursue another lifelong goal: writing.” You may use Worksheet 3.4: Identifying Our Family Business Goals to spell out your family’s goals.

With these goal-setting ideas in mind, you are ready to: • Write out individual goals • Identify common goals • Prioritize goals Write Out Goals.

As an experienced business owner or as a far-sighted entrepreneur, you may have very clear goals and objectives for each component of your business. Or, instead you may choose to develop personal, economic, community and environ mental goals. It’s up to you. The main idea is to get your goals, whatever they may be, down on paper. Written goals will give you “checkpoints” to follow— something to revisit as you evaluate strategic alternatives (Planning Task Four) and monitor your plan following implementation (Planning Task Five).

Identify Common Goals.

Once you and your planning team members have identified goals individually, you should take time to discuss and share them with your planning team. This will enable you to identify common goals, recognize differences, and establish a set of collective priorities for the family and business. “Do not ignore potential conflicts or restrictions that might prevent reaching goals.

Identifying possible problems in the planning stage will allow time to resolve conflicts,”explains Extension educator Damona Doye. 9 Figure 35 describes a few guidelines for group goal setting. If you are having trouble reconciling different goals, mediation services are available to facilitate family discussions. Contact the U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) Farm Service Agency or your local extension service for more information about certified mediators. 3 TASK 94 BUILDING A SUSTAINABLE BUSINESS Figure 35.

Group Goal Setting— Reconciling Different Goals “A question that arises is how business owners can reconcile their different goals. The indi viduals that ask this question have already set their own goals and shared them with their family and co-owners. It is at this point in the process that they realize there are differences that need to be resolved. One observation in answering this question is that the goals of family members and co-owners do not need to, and never will, be identical. It is not reasonable to strive to establish one set of goals that fits everyone.

Yet goals cannot be so divergent that there is nothing in common. Instead, group members should strive to find commonalities among their goals and opportunities to work together to accomplish tasks that fulfill goals of several individuals. For example, there may be an activity that fulfills goals for several people even though they are different goals.

The key to working out differ ences among goals appears to be communication and willingness to cooperate.” 10 9 Goal Setting for Farm and Ranch Families, Doye, 2001. 10Business Planning for Your Farm—Setting Personal and Business Goals, Saxowsky, et al., 1995.