--- Enterprise Evaluation for Profitability: Net returns and break- ---

You will analyze the financial impact of your potential business change
using the same financial criteria or performance measurements that you used
when assessing your current financial situation in Planning Task Two (see
“Glossary” for definitions).
•
Profitability: Will this new strategy significantly increase net income
from the farm?

—Enterprise Evaluation: Net returns and break-evens

—Whole Farm Evaluation: Partial budgeting and long-range planning
•
Liquidity: Will this new strategy help generate cash flow sufficient to
pay back debts in a timely fashion?
•
Solvency: Will this new strategy facilitate continued growth in net worth?
•
Risk: Will this new strategy affect the risks faced by the farm business
and family?
Profitability: Will this new strategy significantly increase
net income from the farm?
Before you can begin to address this question on a whole-farm basis, you
may need to do some preliminary evaluation. If your new strategy includes
the addition of a new product enterprise, you should begin by analyzing each
enterprise separately, using the net return and break-even calculations.
Enterprise Evaluation for Profitability: Net returns and break-
evens. Most financial planning and evaluation begins at the enterprise level.
Whether you are considering the addition of one or more products (enterprises)
to your business, an evaluation at this level can help you settle on profitable
pricing strategies, crop and livestock mixes, and risk management tactics.
Moreover, if you intend to seek outside debt financing for a traditional or
specialty operation, farm lenders will request an enterprise budget to evaluate
the relative credit worthiness of the enterprise.
An enterprise budget is simply a look at the net returns contributed to the
business by each enterprise. It often includes an estimate of the enterprise’s
break-even sales price and volume.
Net return. The net return to an enterprise represents returns to (unpaid)
operator labor, management and equity capital. It is a measure of profitability,
which over the long run should be large enough to justify using unpaid labor
and equity capital.
Net returns are easily calculated, particularly if you have already estimated
sales revenue, output and expenses (marketing, operations, human resources
and finance) in previous Worksheets. Your net return to the enterprise is
4
TASK
168
BUILDING A SUSTAINABLE BUSINESS