--- Agencies, Organizations and Networks ---

Agencies, Organizations and Networks Center for Farm Financial Management. Develops educational tools and software for farmers, agricultural lenders and educators that apply the principles and concepts of farm planning, financing, and analysis in a practical manner.

Farm Credit Services. A network of independently owned and operated credit and financial services institutions that serve farmers, ranchers, agribusinesses of every size and income range across the country.

Farm Service Agency. Offers resources and assistance in stabilizing farm income, helping farmers conserve land and water resources, providing credit to new or disadvantaged farmers and ranchers, and helping farm operations recover from the effects of disaster.

Great Lakes Grazing Network (GLGN). A coalition of farmers, researchers, extensionists, resource agency staff, environmentalists, and others organized to support and promote managed grazing systems for livestock production. Coordinates grazing-based activities, shares research, education, training, policy, and outreach efforts, and develops policies supportive of grazing-based farming systems within the Great Lakes region.

Minnesota Certified Risk Management Consultants.

Listing of risk management consultants by county. C Minnesota Department of Agriculture Sustainable Agriculture Loan Program. Loan program enabling farmers to adopt practices that will lead them to a more sustainable farming system. Loans given for capital purchases, which enhance the environmental and economic viability of the farm.

National Agricultural Risk Management Education Library. USDA initiative that helps farmers locate information, tools, and assistance on risk management related topics.

North American Farmers’ Direct Marketing Association (NAFDMA). Organizes conferences, international farm tours, newsletters, and workshops about the profitability of direct marketing.

Rural Finance Authority (RFA). Provides low-interest financing for beginning farmers. Loan Comparison chart describing interest rates, loan amounts, and applicant requirements available from the Minnesota Department of Agriculture.

Resources 255 BUILDING A SUSTAINABLE BUSINESS