--- A New Business Plan ---

5 TASK 244 BUILDING A SUSTAINABLE BUSINESS also genuinely warmed by the “support” they’ve received from local customers—customers who have remained loyal to the CSF products during difficult economic situations.

Revising Strategies The Minars faced several significant marketing and financing challenges during their start- up years. Despite their best efforts to make home delivery a success, Dave and Florence were forced to abandon this distribution strategy after two years. Internal constraints, such as a failure to find a personable, efficient delivery person combined with the external rise in gas prices and neighborhood demographics which would not support a corresponding rise in product prices, made the home delivery strategy unprofitable. This was surprising and disappointing for the Minar family as the home delivery strategy was originally forecast to generate the lion’s share of new business income.

By contrast, sales at the wholesale level (to retailers) were growing as were sales at the CSF on-farm store. “We had to shift gears a bit,” says Dave. “It wasn’t what we planned on but it was working.” While Dave and Florence redirected their marketing efforts away from home delivery toward wholesale, additional financing was required to manage cash flow needs. “It was a stressful time,” recalls Florence. “We were under-capitalized. But we made it by being flexible and, quite honestly, by foregoing our own income for a while.” Two additional, yet significant, marketing challenges arose during the Cedar Summit Farm start-up years. First, due to new competition from another local creamery using glass bottles, the Minars were forced to further differentiate their product by becoming certified organic.

Second, the Minars were approached by several retailers who wished to stock CSF milk, but did not have the staff or storage capacity to handle returnable glass bottles. In response, the Minars decided to offer waxy cartons in addition to glass-bottles for their milk. Today, approximately one-third of all CSF milk is sold in cartons.

A New Business Plan When asked if they still use their business plan, Dave and Florence shake their heads “no.” “We don’t need to,” says Florence. “We know it by heart!” But, they say, they will be rewriting their plan soon—to lay the foundation for the next phase of their business—growth and, eventually, the transfer of day-to-day business management to the next generation. “We already have ideas brewing,” says Dave. “We’re excited about growing the business … and taking a little time off.” Dave and Florence Minar were interviewed at their farm on November 16, 2009, by Gigi DiGiacomo, research fellow, Department of Applied Economics, University of Minnesota.