--- Resource Needs: What are our ---

Moreover, if you plan to produce, process or market organic crops, you will need to conduct thorough research about national and international certification requirements. You should contact your state Department of Agriculture for information about the new federal organic certification program.

Use Worksheet 4.11: Regulations and Policies to begin your research, listing required permits and licenses, filing requirements, and fees. Next, determine whether or not you will be able to meet legal requirements. Discuss your ideas with planning team members and outside consultants, such as an attorney, when appropriate.

Resource Needs: What are our physical resource needs?

Traditional resource management plans address land, labor and capital.

Here you will identify needs in all of these areas, but limit your strategy development to land, buildings, breeding livestock, equipment and variable inputs or supplies. Labor-related strategies are discussed separately in the Human Resources Strategy section.

Take stock of your operation’s future resource needs for each enterprise and ultimately, the whole farm. Think about how much land you will need, what type of equipment you will use, and any other physical inputs necessary to produce your product. The choices that you make regarding resource use, acquisition and ownership can have a big impact on the overall profitability of your business. The costs of owning and operating farm machinery in Minnesota, for example, account for 20 to 30 percent of the annual per acre production costs for corn and soybeans.39 If you are new to the business or industry and uncertain about resource requirements, try talking with experienced producers or your local Extension educator to begin brainstorming a realistic list of land, livestock, machinery, equipment, labor and other input needs. If you plan to produce a specialty commodity or use an alternative management system, accurate production input records may not be readily available. In this case, your research may take you to the Internet or some of the alternative experiment stations located at universities across the country. Your regional SARE office (see “Resources”) may be able to help you locate information sources in your area.

Dave and Florence Minar developed a list of processing resource needs by visiting other on-farm dairy processing plants and from business plans shared by these same business operators. Using this information, the Minars were able to generate a fairly detailed list of needed machinery, equipment and start-up inputs (Figure 63). 4 TASK 138 BUILDING A SUSTAINABLE BUSINESS 39Sharing Farm Machinery, Weness, 2001. .......