--- significant values (Tables S4, S5, and S6). These ---

the relationships differed from the statistically significant
differences in the individual factors (Fig. S8). They also
contained relatively low concentrations of metabolites
and minor bacteria. Based on the classified data,
structural equation analysis was carried out to
understand the basic structure of the skeleton in this
complex system.
The structural equation calculates the combination
showing the optimum value. Among the calculated
models for DPPH as an indicator of antioxidant activity,
the multiple regression model with amino acids,
flavonoids, and carotenoids (Figs. 4a and S9a) had the
highest optimal fit index values (Table S1). Therefore,
the structural equation for flavonoids was calculated
with phenylalanine, a flavonoid precursor, focusing on
the factors that actually changed in the above
observations.
As
a
result,
apigenin
7-O-
neohesperidoside,
kaempferol-Gal-Rha,
and
quercetin_Glc, as leaf flavonoids, root L-2-aminoadipate,
and phenylalanine formulated the optimal structural
equation (Figs. 4b and S9b) rather than the other inferior
models (Table S2). These estimations suggested that
compost amendments are structurally involved as a
group in the concentration of flavonoids, amino acids,
and carotenoids in carrots, as well as in the antioxidant
activity of carrots.
Next, the relationships between the changes observed
in the compost-treated soil were constructed by
modeling structural equations. The soil bacterial
candidates
and
soil
metabolites
that
showed
representative changes by compost amendment were
selected in the above experiment. The relationship of
the soil factors associated with compost amendments
was visualized as optimal SEM (Figs. 4c and S9c): an
optimal model that included the genus Paenibacillus,
DL-2-aminoadipate, nicotinamide, and S-methyl L-
cysteine showed good fit indices compared to those of
the other models (Table S3). Furthermore, causal
mediation analysis revealed that a single mediation
(indirect) effect (ACME) was not calculable or without
significant values (Tables S4, S5, and S6). These
calculated results estimated a strong relationship as
each
group.
Therefore,
the
causal
interactive
relationships within each optimal model of the leaf, root,
and soil were investigated based on a calculation by
BayesLiNGAM (Figs. S10). The highest causal
interactive relationships (top six) were mainly shown
from compost but not always. This may mean that the
compost supports it while the physiological responses of
the carrot and/or the soil themselves are prioritized.
These results pointed to the importance of the optimal
model as a whole group, as well as the optimal model
group estimated for the leaf and root.
Therefore, nitrogen compounds were involved in these
structural equations for leaves, roots, and soil. Based on
these observations, the genus Paenibacillus derived
from compost was explored, followed by a search for its
function within the compost itself.

Genome profiles associated with plant growth
promotion
As described above, the SEM results suggested that the
genus Paenibacillus may be a necessary component of
compost for the promotion of plant growth. Therefore, we
isolated compost-derived colonies that tested positive for
a nitrogen fixation gene and were able to select two
strains that had a nitrogen fixation reaction from
compost-cultured colonies. The compost-derived strains
Paenibacillus
macerans
HMSSN-036
and
Paenibacillus sp. HMSSN-139 were identified, and their
genomes were analyzed: the former, a strain closely
related to Paenibacillus macerans (identity 99.0%); the
latter, a candidate as a new species belonging to
Paenibacillus. In Figs. 5a-d, electron micrographs of
these strains showed the spore- and vegetative-forms.
The molecular phylogenetic tree of these isolates is
shown in Fig. 5e. Phylogenetic analysis with mash
distance
(Fig.
S11)
showed
that
the
isolated
Paenibacillus
strains
were
classified
into
weak
sequences for P. curdianolyticus and P. kobensis
detected by meta-sequence analysis of the 16S bacterial
rRNA gene sequence: Their population was not detected
in the control and 0.022± 0.011% in the test group
(p=0.116). These observations indicated that the isolated
Paenibacillus strains did not necessarily coincide with the
sequence of Paenibacillus species increasing in the
compost-amended soil. Still, it is interesting that the
same Paenibacillus increased in the soil. Furthermore,
genome analyses showed the presence of the genes for
nitrogen
fixation,
auxin
production,
phosphate
solubilization, and siderophore reactions such as PGPR
(Tables 1 and S7-S10). Based on genomic information,
biological assays were performing for auxin production,
siderophore reaction, and phosphate solubilization and
all of these assays were demonstrated to be positive (Fig.
S12). Therefore, the genes detected in isolated
Paenibacillus strains could be functional for nitrogen
fixation, auxin production, siderophore reaction, and
phosphate solubilization in the bacterium.
These
results
suggest
that
compost-derived
Paenibacillus strains may exhibit PGPR effects.

Evaluation of the effects of compost itself on the
promotion of plant growth
The nitrogen cycle function of compost with nitrogen-
fixing Paenibacillus was then evaluated with in vitro soil
models. Two functional evaluations of nitrogen fixation
and reduction of nitrous oxide generation were
conducted.
First, as shown in Fig. S12a, the nitrogen fixation
capacity was evaluated in soil with the stable nitrogen
isotope 15N added. The Arabidopsis thaliana model plant
was cultured to assess the effects on nitrogen fixation,
and a growth promotion effect, although not significant,
was observed (Fig. S12b). Under such conditions,
nitrogen fixation rates of approximately 20% were
possible in the plant and soil. Based on these
observations, it is possible that the soil modulates
nitrogen fixation in the field after exposure to compost.
The results of the elemental analysis of the soil
immediately after the cultivation of the carrot-grown soil
in this field test changed significantly, although it was