--- Page 8 ---

Agronomy 2020, 10, 605 8 of 16 improve crop water-use eﬃciency”. Soil water is a solvent utilized by plants to carry essential nutrients and a principal constituent of the growing plant, which also regulates soil temperatures [37].

Microorganisms also require water and favorable soil temperatures for metabolism and other activities such as decomposition of organic matter [38]. Soil temperatures, moisture and aeration are all essential for healthy soil and are the main edaphic factors controlling soil respiration [39]. In addition, water and nutrient (especially phosphorus) uptake is limited at temperatures below 10 ◦C [15]. In the wake of global warming, organic mulch plays a crucial role in soil productivity by moderating soil temperatures [9,40]. The combination of mulch and NT plays a crucial role in combating climate change by sequestering more carbon in the soil with minimal emissions of CO2 into the atmosphere. As indicated in Figure 4, NT emits signiﬁcantly lower CO2 compared to other tillage systems. The study was conducted in an arid environment in Morocco, on a site dominated by soils of poor or no proﬁle development (Rogosols), dark cracking clays (Vertisols), and calcareous soil (Calcisols). In addition, the area is characterized with low mean annual precipitation and high rates of evapotranspiration [22].

According to Paustian et al. [41], improved soil management can substantially reduce greenhouse gas emissions and sequester some of the CO2 removed from the atmosphere by plants, as carbon (C) in soil organic matter. More than 25% of the greenhouse gas emissions attributed to agriculture could be reduced by employing soil management strategies such as zero or no-till [6] and the addition of plant derived C external sources like compost or biochar. Paustian et al. [41] noted that both compost and biochar are more slowly decomposed compared to fresh plant residue, with compost typically having a mean residence time several times greater than un-composted organic matter, and biochar mineralizes 10–100 times more slowly than uncharred biomass. Thus, a large fraction of added C–particularly for biochar–can be retained in the soil over several decades or longer, although residence time vary depending on the amendment type, nutrient content and soil conditions (such as moisture, temperature and texture). According to Davidson and Janssens. [42], the production of CO2 in soils is almost entirely from root respiration and microbial decomposition of organic matter.

Conservation Agriculture (CA) is part of climate smart agriculture that can be used to address climate change issues [41]. Currently, CA is being promoted in many regions of the world [30] especially in semi-arid areas, to rehabilitate degraded soils and improve ecosystem services [43]. The beneﬁcial eﬀect of CA reﬂects not only in terms of increased crop productivity and labor saving but it also helps in achieving environmental sustainability beside soil and land regeneration [11].

Figure 4. Soil CO2 ﬂux associated with primary full tillage as compared to no tillage (NT) systems [22].