--- software, Center for Farm Financial ---

market. When there are several producers selling the same product, with no significant differences among them in quality, the price will quickly converge to a single level. Originally, this may be at a level that covers all costs and yields a profit, at least for the most efficient producers. By the end of the market day, though, the price for a perishable product may drop well below production costs if several producers still have a large supply of product that will be wasted if not sold. In this same situation, if customers perceive one producer’s product as higher quality, that producer will be able to charge a higher price. As the price of the higher quality product increases, though, the least loyal customers will opt for lower price over higher quality. Competition sets a ceiling on the price the market will bear for any product. The more intense the competition, the more difficult it will be to charge a premium price. In this example we have focused on competition at the same farmers’ market. It’s important to recognize that the relevant competition may be the local supermarket or some other product altogether.

Dave and Florence Minar used their 2000 financial analysis (created with FINPACK software2) to calculate average prices they receive for each of the four meat categories they market. The prices for beef and pork reflect retail sales per pound of live weight. They are, of course, much lower than prices for retail cuts of meat, but they are well above prices farmers receive for “commodity” steers and hogs. Similarly, the prices for chickens and turkeys are on a per bird basis, and they are well above retail prices for “commodity” chickens and turkey. The Minars note that they have a high level of power in setting prices for these products, but they also face some demand sensitivity to price changes.

As you complete the “Pricing” section of Worksheet 2.2 for each of your products, record the typical price level (or range of price levels if there is significant variation) and the size of the premium, if any, that your product receives over a typical competitor’s price. Also, comment on your ability to set the price and the sensitivity of demand to price increases. For example, if you are the only seller of a truly unique product, you have a high degree of power in setting the price. You may have no power if you are selling into a highly competitive market with many other sellers. Regardless of your ability to establish a price, the quantity you sell may or may not be sensitive to price increases. Demand for a unique, high-quality cheese may hardly be affected by a significant price increase, while buyers of free-range chickens may switch to grass-fed beef if the price of chickens rises dramatically relative to that of beef. 2 TASK 36 BUILDING A SUSTAINABLE BUSINESS 2 FINPACK software, Center for Farm Financial Management, University of Minnesota, updated annually. .......