--- Break-even Volume = ---

4
TASK
169
BUILDING A SUSTAINABLE BUSINESS
calculated by subtracting total expenses from gross returns.
Worksheet 4.31: Enterprise Budget Break-even Analysis can
be used to calculate enterprise returns.
Break-evens. A break-even analysis is probably one of the most useful
calculations that you will perform when considering alternative business
strategies. Break-even numbers can be used to instantly identify those
enterprises that don’t cover variable and fixed costs of production.
If you intend to sign a market contract or lock in a future price for your
product, crunch some numbers to determine what level of production is
necessary at that price to break even. Make sure you can cover your variable
and fixed costs of production. On the flip side, if your output or production
volume is fixed, try calculating a break-even value to determine what product
price is necessary to break even on production and marketing-related costs. If
neither your price nor output is fixed, these calculations can be used to develop
production and price floors for each enterprise—something that will be useful
for future monitoring and decision-making.
Calculating a break-even volume. Break-even volumes will tell you the
minimum production volume necessary to cover your costs of production.
You might consider this a lower size limit for your business. The break-even
volume is calculated by dividing total annual fixed costs for the enterprise by
the difference between your estimated market value and variable costs for
each enterprise. Substitute the DIRTI costs of capital ownership (depreciation,
interest, repairs, taxes, and insurance) for the actual cost when estimating
the ownership costs of annual fixed expenses. Use the cost estimates that you
developed in Worksheet 4.28 along with market values developed in Worksheet
4.9 to calculate break-even volumes. Try experimenting with a range of market
prices to see how they affect your break-even production levels.
Calculating a break-even value. If your production volume is fixed—either
because of production capacity or sales contracts—calculate a break-even value
for your product; in other words, determine what market price is needed to
cover your variable and fixed costs. Break-even values are calculated by dividing
your total costs for the product or enterprise by the total quantity you expect to
produce or sell. Again, your total costs are the sum of your direct and overhead
expenses for the enterprise.
Worksheet 4.31 will walk you through a break-even analysis. The
Worksheet is not reproduced for the Minars’ bottled milk enterprise for
confidentiality reasons. Instead, an example is presented in Figure 88 for
an imaginary bed and breakfast business whose annual direct and overhead
expenses average $800 and $4,000, respectively. Both a break-even volume
Break-even Volume =

overhead expenses
market

direct

price
–
expenses

unit

unit
Break-even Value =
overhead +
direct
expenses expenses

production

volume
[
]