--- Tools and Delivery: ---

Promotion: How and what will we communicate to our buyers or customers?

Promotion is a must if you are going to gain product recognition among customers. Promotional strategies often are built around a “message.” The message that you deliver about your product or business is just as important as the product itself. Equally important is how and when you deliver that message through the use of advertising tools and media.

Image or product. Before beginning detailed promotions research, think about an overall strategy approach. Will you concentrate promotions on your business image, the product, or both (total approach)?

Businesses use brand or image advertising to build awareness and interest in their products. A brand is represented by a name, term, sign, symbol, design or some combination. A brand or logo is used to identify the products of your business and to distinguish them from other competitors.34 Although the establishment of a brand can be expensive, particularly for small businesses, many of today’s alternative farm businesses are concentrating their promotional efforts on image advertising—promoting the concept of “healthy” or “locally produced” or “eco-friendly” products.

The Minars plan to promote Cedar Summit Farm products through the use of a new label and logo design that will appear on all products and in their brochure.

They hired a family artist to develop a variety of logos that would communicate their overriding values and new business mission statement.

Product advertising aims to create immediate sales through some type of special product offer, such as seasonal discounts, frequent buyer clubs, and in-store samples. For instance, Northwind Nursery and Orchard owner Frank Foltz developed a three-pronged product strategy to: “(1) Make use of excess products by distributing them as advertising samples—we will give it to customers who can use it. They will repay us many times over in ‘word of mouth’ advertising; (2) Give our customer discounts for bringing in other customers or distributing our literature, etc. . . . Give those who organize group orders a bonus; and (3) Reward loyal customers with extra services that will help them succeed.” 4 TASK 126 BUILDING A SUSTAINABLE BUSINESS 34Marketing, Kurtz and Boone, 1981.

Promotion Strategy Your promotion strategy should include a promotional method, specific promotional tools, and your ideas for actual promotion or delivery.

Message: What do I want my customer to know about my product?

Tools and Delivery: What will I use to communicate my message?

Timing and Frequency:

How often will I contact my customers via advertising and communications?

Costs: How much will my advertising and communication cost? .......