--- Worksheet 4.19: Filling Workforce Needs ---

Ultimately, your labor strategy— your decision to hire workers, purchase equipment or reorganize the business—will depend on your financial goals and personal values. For instance, there is clearly more than one way for the Minars to staff their processing plant and to fill distribution and production positions.

In addition to family labor, they could have considered hired labor and employees for processing and crop production. However, because their values and planning purpose are rooted in the idea of creating jobs and income for family members, they limited their strategy options to hiring family members and redefining family member roles as a way to fill most new jobs/ tasks. As you develop a workforce strategy, revisit your values and goals for human resources. Think about your willingness to perform fieldwork, communicate with customers, work with livestock, or maintain financial records, among other things.

Use Worksheet 4.19: Filling Workforce Needs to describe your strategy for addressing workforce gaps or acquiring and training labor.

Worksheet 4.19 Filling Workforce Needs Position/Task Type of Position Skills/Experience Desired Acquisition Strategy (title) (full time/part time, temporary/permanent) 1. Describe training that may be required for new positions or new members of the workforce: 2. How will training be accomplished?

CONTINUED Farm staff (new milker) Designer/Artist (New logo) One full-time, permanent position One part-time, temporary position Milking experience; comfortable around animals; reliable Experience with logo design; graphic art skills; creativity Fill externally: hire CSF employee Fill internally with family labor: Bob White All processing plant staff will need to be trained in equipment use, product safety/quality testing, and packag- ing procedures. Our current partner, Paul, will need to be trained in pasture management. Our other workforce members bring the necessary skills to the operation so there should not be very much training.

Pladot [equipment manufacturer] will provide all training on-site at our plant once it is built - they will help us learn how to operate equipment, select recipes, and package our products. They provide several weeks of ini- tial training and additional technical support as needed. Dave [Minar] will be responsible for working with Paul Kajer on pasture management. 4 TASK 151 BUILDING A SUSTAINABLE BUSINESS ........