--- Regulations and Policy: What ---

schedule for each batch of bottled milk, yogurt, sour cream, butter and ice cream that was not included in their business plan. It served as an internal guide for operations.

Use Worksheet 4.10: Production System and Schedule to describe your operations schedule. If you plan to make a gradual transition over time, either from one system to another or through the addition of new enterprises, use Worksheet 4.10 to map out a short-term production plan and descriptions for each phase of the transition. Use a map, a calendar or the space provided. Discuss your schedule with experienced farmers, planning team members, and consultants to determine if your production system and overall schedule are realistic.

Regulations and Policy: What institutional requirements exist?

Like it or not, if you are going to operate a retail business, process on your farm, or greatly expand livestock production, you will run into local zoning, permitting, licensing and regulatory issues. Regulations can have a major impact on your production and operations plans as well as on start-up costs. Dave and Florence Minar, for example, had to obtain seven permits to build a plant and process their own milk (Figure 61).

The type of permits or licenses required for your business will depend on where you are in the business life-cycle (whether you are just starting up or growing your business), where you live, what type of product you offer, and the overall size of your operation. Therefore, before going too far with your operations research, it’s a good idea to check with your state’s Small Business Association as well as your local or county regulators to learn about environmental, construction, finance, bonding and product safety regulations. In Minnesota, A Guide to Starting a Business in Minnesota 38 lists all necessary state permits and licenses as well as informational contacts. Some examples of the agriculture-related licenses and permits required by the State of Minnesota are listed in Figure 62. 4 TASK 137 BUILDING A SUSTAINABLE BUSINESS 1.Conditional Use Permit from Scott County Planning and Zoning 2.Septic Tank Permit from Scott County Environmental Health 3.Health and Safety Plan Approval from the Minnesota Department of Health 4.Building Permit and Inspection from the Scott County Building and Inspections Division 5.Environmental Operating Permit from the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency 6.Food Handlers’ License from the Minnesota Department of Agriculture 7.Dairy Plant License from the Minnesota Department of Agriculture Figure 61.

Permits Required by Cedar Summit Farm to Build Plant and Process 38A Guide to Starting a Business in Minnesota, Minnesota Small Business Assistance Office, updated annually. • Aquaculture License • Apiary Certificate of Inspection • Farmstead Cheese Permit • Dairy Plant License • Grade A Milk Production Permit • Feedlot Permit • Retail and Wholesale Food Handler License • Livestock Meat Processing and Packing License Figure 62.

Some Agricultural Licenses and Permits Required by the State of Minnesota