--- Management and Communication: ---

Compensation: How will we pay family and members of our workforce?

Wages and other benefits that you offer family, employees, hired labor, interns and contracted labor will vary with industry rates and standards as well as the type of work involved and, of course, your values. You and your planning team will need to consider all of these factors when developing a labor compensation package as part of your overall human resources strategy.

A good place to begin developing your benefits strategy is by looking at industry standards. Find out what salary and other benefits are typical for your business (check with your state Department of Agriculture or talk to other farmers) and adjust them according to your own values and goals. The Minars, for instance, decided to pay their son a salary that was comparable to what he earned as a production supervisor at a high-tech medical supply manufacturer.

Although this salary may be well above dairy industry standards, Dave and Florence agreed to offer their son a comparable salary because of his commit ment to the business, family needs, and their own vision of a “fair” wage. Of course, the Minars’ plan to pay an above-average salary must be balanced against their financial objectives for cash flow, profitability, and net equity growth—something they had to consider when evaluating their strategic plan.

In addition to a cash wage or salary, common forms of labor compensation include housing (room and board), products (milk, meat, nursery stock, cheese), automobile, insurance (health, accident), stocks or shares of the business, and retirement investments, such as a Simplified Employeed Pension (SEP) Plan or 401K.49 You may want to review business organization alternative strategies (addressed as you develop a Finance Strategy in the next section) to explore tax and other institutional requirements before settling on a labor compensation strategy. An accountant or attorney will be able to help you work out the details of human resources compensation.

Use Worksheet 4.20: Compensation to research and draft a compen sation plan for each new position or worker. Then use this information to develop monthly and hourly labor input expense estimates for each position in Worksheet 4.21: Human Resources Expense Estimates. These will be used as you evaluate the profitability and cash flow of your alternative strategies.

Management and Communication:

Who will manage the business and how?

Good management and communication are pivotal and often intangible qualities of a successful business. No matter how well a business strategy has been researched and evaluated, it will not help accomplish your goals unless there is an effective manager behind it— one who knows how to communicate.

Therefore, spend a little time fleshing out a management and communication 4 TASK 152 BUILDING A SUSTAINABLE BUSINESS 49Acquiring and Managing Resources for the Farm Business, Thomas, 2001. .......