--- Record Keeping Ideas ---

Following are other examples of monitoring checkpoints taken from the business plans prepared by Mabel Brelje, Mary Doerr, Dave and Florence Minar, and Greg Reynolds: • Increase Community Supported Agriculture share sales by 20 percent this year • Pay down debt by 15 percent this year • Provide health care for all employees by December • Identify buyer for farm within two years Of course, the goals that you outlined in Planning Task Three (Vision, Mission and Goals) can be used as long-term critical success factors. Likewise, the financial ratios described in Planning Task Two (History and Current Situation), as well as your long-range income and cash flow projections developed in Planning Task Four (Strategic Planning and Evaluation), can be used as monitoring benchmarks from which to track and compare the financial performance of your business over the long-run. In fact, FINFLO—the cash flow planning piece of FINPACK—includes a “Monitoring Worksheet” to help you monitor planned versus actual cash flows during the year. By monitoring cash flow performance, it may be possible to adjust your operating plan before experiencing financial adversity.

If you are interested in tracking natural resource benefits, check out the Monitoring Tool Box developed by the Land Stewardship Project. This publication provides Worksheets and practical suggestions on how to monitor some of those intangibles (quality of life), as well as the tangibles, (stream and soil quality) (see “Resources”).

Use Worksheet 5.3: Monitoring to develop a checklist or calendar of timely objectives to help you track the immediate progress of your business.

Maintain Records.

Keeping careful records! At the end of the year, with good records in hand, you will be able to compare actual yields, costs and sales to those projected figures in your business plan as well as any other monitoring checkpoints established by your planning team.

Records can be formal accounts of financial performance, productivity and sales. However, records can also take the form of “field” observations to You may decide to maintain records for everything from songbird counts to input expenses. Below are examples of just a few of the record-keeping possibilities for each functional area of your business.

Marketing. Maintain a customer database to track purchases, feedback and customer location. Addresses, phone numbers and email contact information for each customer can be obtained from personal checks or sign-up sheets at farmers’ markets or local events.

Operations. Track the productivity of each enterprise—such as yields or rates of gain—as well as other indicators like pasture composition, soil composition, the protein content of feed, and wildlife populations on your farm. Use a simple notebook or chart to record this information for future use.

Human Resources. Record the number of hours that you spend on the job. This can be time consuming in itself, but one way to get a gauge of your labor time is to track your hours during a “typical” week or month—one that is representative of the different tasks that you perform during a typical year for each enterprise. From these records, you can estimate time spent working on the farm for the entire year.

Finances. Manual or computerized accounting systems can be used to develop an annual balance sheet, accrual income statement, monthly cash flow, enterprise cost/profit center reports, and a financial ratio summary (FINPACK, Quicken for Farm Financial Records or Farm Biz—see “Resources”).

Figure 104.

Record Keeping Ideas 5 TASK 241 BUILDING A SUSTAINABLE BUSINESS