--- patterns. Survey results are available from MDA’s Minnesota Grown Program. ---

Although much of the market research needed for a business plan can begin with your own impressions and a little footwork at the library, you may reach a point where professional help is needed. Many businesses find it useful to hire a marketing consultant to develop proper surveys, lead focus groups, or to conduct telephone interviews. Representatives from your local Extension service or your state Department of Agriculture may be able to assist you in locating qualitative and quantitative information for a customer profile. The Minnesota Department of Agriculture (MDA), for instance, conducted its own surveys of farmers’ market, u-pick, and Christmas tree farm customers about spending patterns. Survey results are available from MDA’s Minnesota Grown Program.

MDA also offers a comprehensive listing of more than 65 regional businesses that buy or process certified organic grains, oilseeds, fruits, vegetables, herbs and maple syrup.19 Financial assistance may also be available to help cover some of the costs associated with your marketing research. You should check with your state Department of Agriculture, your local county Extension service (these phone numbers should be listed in your telephone book), as well as the United States Department of Agriculture (USDA), to see what programs are available in your area. The USDA Service Center locations give you access to the services and programs provided by the Farm Service Agency, Natural Resources Conservation Service, and the Rural Development agencies.20 You might also contact the Sustainable Agriculture Research and Education (SARE) Program in your region to see if they know of any programs available to fund market research for farmers (www.sare.org/). In Minnesota, the Minnesota Department of Agriculture and the Agricultural Utilization and Research Institute (AURI) both provide some financial assistance for marketing research. AURI provides grants to individual business owners and cooperatives for the development of logos, labels and marketing plans (see “Resources”).

Product: What product will we offer and how is it unique?

Although customer research is the single most important component in building a marketing strategy, it is often the product itself that inspires and excites many business owners. Here’s your chance to develop a thorough product description. Recall that a “product” is any commodity, final consumer good, or service.

As you think about the products your business will offer, try to describe them in terms of the value they will bring to your customers. What is it that customers are actually buying? Dave and Florence Minar described their bottle milk products as “non-homogenized, cream-top milk from grass-fed cows.” In the Minars’ case, customers will be buying old-fashioned taste (non- homogenized milk) and perceived health benefits (associated with milk from 4 TASK 112 BUILDING A SUSTAINABLE BUSINESS 19Buyers of Organic Products in the Upper Midwest, Minnesota Department of Agriculture, 2002. 20To locate the USDA Center nearest you go to: https://offices.sc.egov.usda.gov/locator/app .......