--- Appendix B:  Farm Financial Standards Council ---

Appendix B:  Farm Financial Standards Council Business Performance Measures (Sweet Sixteen) The following calculations and descriptions were adapted from the 2000 Farm Business Management Report for Central and West Central Minnesota.

Liquidity Current Ratio: Calculated as (total current farm assets) / (total current farm liabilities).

This measure of liquidity reflects the extent to which current farm assets, if sold tomorrow, would pay off current farm liabilities.

Working Capital: Calculated as (total current farm assets) – (total current farm liabilities). This measure represents the short-term operating capital available from within the business.

Solvency Debt-to-Asset Ratio: Calculated as (total farm liabilities) / (total farm assets). This represents the bank’s share of your business. A higher ratio is an indicator of greater financial risk and lower borrowing capacity.

Equity-to-Asset Ratio: Calculated as (farm net worth) / (total farm assets). This measure of solvency compares farm equity to total farm assets.

Debt-to-Equity Ratio: Calculated as (total farm liabilities) / (farm net worth). This measure compares the bank’s ownership to your ownership of the business.

Profitability Rate of Return on Assets: Calculated as [(net farm income) + (farm interest) – (value of operator labor and management)] / (average value of farm assets). This measure represents the average “interest” rate being earned on all investments in the business (your investment and that of your creditors).

Rate of Return on Equity: Calculated as [(net farm income) – (value of operator labor and management)] / (average farm net worth). This measure represents the “interest” rate being earned by your investment in the farm. This return can be compared to the return on your investments if equity were invested somewhere else, outside the business.

Operating Profit Margin: Calculated as (return on farm assets) / (value of farm production), where return on farm assets equals (net farm income from operation) + (farm interest expense) – (opportunity return to labor and management). This measure Appendices 273 BUILDING A SUSTAINABLE BUSINESS