--- Whole Farm Strategy ---

Whole Farm Strategy Throughout this Guide, we’ve asked you to break out your business into marketing, operations, human resources and finance components. Now, it’s time to pull all of these components together—to make sure that the strategies you’ve chosen for each functional area are compatible as an integrated system.

If you’ve identified more than one strategy for each functional area, then think about how each strategic alternative might impact the business and other strategies. Dave and Florence Minar considered two operations strategies— the use of new versus used processing equipment. By evaluating how each of these equipment alternatives would affect the marketing, human resources, and finance components of their business, they temporarily ruled out used equipment as an operations strategy and pursued on-farm processing with the use of a new Mini-Dairy equipment package. They reasoned that although the new equipment package was more expensive, it was also more compatible with their overall vision. The new equipment package (which included training and product recipes) would enable them to begin processing and marketing a full line of products from the start, while creating immediate jobs for all of their children who wanted to return to the farm. In contrast, the used equipment alternative would cost the Minars time, sales, and potentially more money in the long-run as they searched for and fit the equipment to their operation, learned how to use the equipment, and experimented with inputs to develop their own products and recipes.

Think about these types of system-wide connections before you move on to the evaluation section. Then use Worksheet 4.29: Summarize a Whole Farm Strategic Plan of Action to shape one or more whole farm strategies for your business. If you’ve completed the Summary Worksheets throughout the Planning Tasks (Worksheets 4.9, 4.17, 4.23 and 4.28) this final task should be relatively easy. With a whole farm strategy you will be ready to analyze your business for long-term profitability and cash flow.

If you haven’t already researched product and enterprise expenses for each of the individual strategies you’ve developed (marketing, operations, human resources, finance), do so now. Secure “certified bids” for all equipment and machinery from manufacturers, dealers or representatives. Certified bids come directly from the equipment representative and are often required by lenders when applying for a loan. When certified bids are unavailable, look for published cost estimates (available for the Upper Midwest through the Center for Farm Financial Management—see “Resources”) or talk with other producers who purchased similar inputs or who have initiated a similar business strategy. 4 TASK 164 BUILDING A SUSTAINABLE BUSINESS