--- sources of competition are grocery stores, Meyer Bros. Home Delivery and Schwans. Meyer Bros. buys ---

Competition
We know of no farmer in our area that is processing and selling his own dairy products. Our other
sources of competition are grocery stores, Meyer Bros. Home Delivery and Schwans. Meyer Bros. buys
milk and resells it, and Schwans will affect us only with ice cream. We have some local competition with
our meat products, but we still sell out.
Human Resources
Paul Kajer is our herd manager and is in charge of milking and general welfare of the dairy herd. Paul
was raised on a dairy farm near New Prague and grew up taking care of dairy animals. Paul worked for
us during high school, and for a while after he graduated, until he started farming on his own. Paul, like
most other young farmers, had a hard time starting on his own so he moved his herd in with ours in 1997
and became our herdsman.

Tammy Kajer (Paul’s wife), will work in the processing plant, the store, do accounting and help with
marketing.

Lisa White is our graphic designer. Lisa does our brochures and promotion material.

Bob White (Lisa’s husband), is our artist and marketing advisor.

Chris Minar probably won’t be involved in our venture. Chris is an Aeronautical/ Medical Engineer
and head of his company’s research and development department. We have used his engineering and
management expertise.

Linda Minar (Chris’ wife) has an associate degree in accounting. Linda will work in accounting,
promotions and the store as her work permits.

Mike Minar will be our processing manager. Mike graduated with a degree in Fishery and Wildlife
Management and Biology.

Merrisue Minar has a degree in business administration and is willing to manage home deliveries,
work in the store, and help with accounting and promotions.

Laura Ganske will drive the delivery truck, help with processing, manage the store and work in
marketing and promotions.

Eric Ganske (Laura’s husband), is our computer guru. He will host the Web site and keep it updated,
be our technical support and work in the store when his job allows.

Dan Minar is in business school right now taking business management and marketing. Dan will be
the business manager in due time. He must learn the business from the ground up first. While he is
in school he will be involved in building the plant, working in the plant and store, making deliveries,
marketing and all other aspects of the business.
All of our children and their spouses have worked at one time on the farm, and therefore, have a
working knowledge of farming.
Appendices
271
BUILDING A SUSTAINABLE BUSINESS