--- Financial Environment: What is our ---

legal and regulatory uncertainty (institutional risk), contract risk, and other forms of financial risk. Each of these sources of risk is described briefly in Figure 28.

Use Worksheet 2.17: Risk Management to evaluate your business’ exposure to risk. Like the Minars, rank your business’ exposure to production, market, financial and personal risk. Then list any tools or strategies that you are using to cope with and manage for that risk.

Financial Environment: What is our current business environment and how is it changing?

This is the last question to consider in assessing your farm’s current financial situation. Analysis of financial statements for your operation focuses on internal forces affecting the financial history and current situation of your farm business. Your financial future will also be affected by what is happening externally to your business, within your industry and in the general economy.

The following are external forces that are especially important for the financial health of your operation: • Interest Rates. In the late 1970s and early 1980s, high interest rates placed a heavy burden on any business that was using substantial borrowed capital. Could another such situation develop in the future? • Employment. Will dependable, knowledgeable employees be available at a wage (including possible benefits) that you can afford to pay? Quite recently, this was a problem for many small businesses. Wage rates had increased sharply owing to high employment levels and a greater demand for dependable workers. • Inflation. Producers who sell into the commodity markets have long known that inflation tends to increase farm costs much faster than farm prices. Is there potential that we could find ourselves in another inflationary period like that experienced during the 1970s? • Government Actions. If your products are currently supported by government programs, will the current level Personal risk is the result of change and uncer tainty within the business. Injuries and illness are sources of internal risk that can affect your business’ ability to operate. Other sources of personal risk include a change in goals, divorce, death and fire. All of these events can have a significant impact on the long-term performance of your business. You might even consider your own lack of knowledge and experience in a new area a risk, as it may create uncertainty as you transition from one management system to another. The business may be exposed to some internal risk as you learn to control pests and build soil fertility without the use of synthetic chemicals. “This [learning process] may lead to greater production risks and the potential for lower yields,” notes organic certification special ist Lisa Gulbranson.

Production and market risks are those risks that result from weather-related events such as drought, excess rainfall, hail, extreme tempera tures, insects and disease. External price risks are often tied to below-cost market prices and vola tility in commodity and input prices after produc tion commitments have been made. Institutional risk is associated with changes in government policy and regulations that govern market prices, crop insurance, waste management and livestock housing facilities.

Contract risk is associated with the reliabil ity (or lack thereof) of contracting partners.

Although the use of production and marketing contracts are cited as risk management tools, you should be aware that the contracts them selves may pose a risk to your operation if the contractor/contractee is unreliable.

Financial risk can occur as a result of fluctuat ing interest rates on borrowed funds, cash flow difficulties, and erosion of equity or net worth.

Figure 28.

Common Sources of Agricultural Risk5 2 TASK 62 BUILDING A SUSTAINABLE BUSINESS 5 Managing Risk in Farming: Concepts, Research and Analysis, Harwood, et al., 1999.