--- Develop a Strategic Financial Plan ---

As you consider financial alternatives, be creative.

Regardless of whether you are a beginning or experienced business owner, you may be able to identify and employ several alternatives to meet your goals, limit risk, and increase financial flexibility.

The Minars identified two finance strategies for needed equipment—lease agreements with Ag Star and debt financing from their local bank.

Use Worksheet 4.27: Finance to identify one or more financing strategies for your business. You may not be able to answer all the finance questions until after you’ve completed your business plan— particularly if your purpose for planning is to secure outside financing.

Still, you should begin this research and identify the most plausible strategy alternatives for your business.

Develop a Strategic Financial Plan You’ve done a lot of research and brainstorming in this section about risk management, business organization, and capital financing strategies. Use Worksheet 4.28: Financial Strategy Summary to summarize your financial strategies for each enterprise into one strategic financial plan for the whole farm. If you are considering more than one whole-farm financial strategy at this point, describe both in the space provided. You may not be able to narrow down your alternatives until after completing a whole-farm evaluation.

Dave and Florence Minar initially recorded two external capital financing options—leasing and debt financing. In Worksheet 4.27, they described the advantages and disadvantages of each alternative. However, it wasn’t until they had consulted with a financial advisor that they made their final decision to finance the business through a lease agreement with Ag Star.

The Minars then went back and summarized their financial strategy, highlighting their legal organization and borrowing components.

Interest on longterm debt Insurance Other Business Plan Input–Financial Strategy Summary:

We plan to organize the processing portion of our business [Cedar Summit Creamery] as an LLC so that we can gradually transfer shares and ownership to our children in preparation for retirement. The Creamery will finance all start-up and annual equipment costs. Cedar Summit Farm will finance and own the processing building.

All start-up, intermediate, and long-term equipment and building needs will be financed using 7-10 year lease arrangements from Ag-Star. All future growth will be financed through retained earnings from the Creamery business. 4 TASK 163 BUILDING A SUSTAINABLE BUSINESS Operating Intermediate Longterm Real estate Ag Star 7.8% Seven-year lease. Payments tax deductible. At end of lease, CSC will own all equipment Local Bank 8.2 % Seven-year payments. SBA guarantee required.

Ag Star 7.8% Ten-year lease for building. Payments tax deductible. At end of lease, CSF will own the processing building.

Local Bank 8.2 % Ten-year payments. SBA guarantee required Figure 83.

Excerpt from Cedar Summit Farm’s Worksheet 4.27:  Finance Figure 84.

Excerpt from Cedar Summit Farm’s Worksheet 4.28:  Financial Strategy Summary