--- A Brief History of ---

A Brief History of Your Business Before jumping into a summary of your current situation, it’s important to look back to important events and decisions from the past one, five or ten years—whatever time frame can best describe why and how you’ve arrived at your current business situation.

If you’re an experienced farmer or business owner, think about the different phases you have gone through in terms of marketing, operations, human resources and finances. Identify your most important successes and failures as well as the key opportunities and challenges you have encountered. Reflect on what you’ve learned from your experiences. Consider how your values have shaped the choices you’ve made.

If you’re a beginning farmer or rural entrepreneur, focus on previous personal, economic, environmental, and community experiences that triggered your current desire to begin a business. Also, take time to learn about the history of the land you’ll farm, the markets you’ll serve and the industry you plan to enter. Understanding and developing strategies to serve viable markets is a key aspect of the business planning process and a critical ingredient for the success of your business plan. It’s important to look beyond your own operation to its economic environment as you review the history of your business.

This review of your business and personal history, as well as market and industry trends, will be valuable as you develop a business plan, particularly as you begin to consider alternative strategies. The circumstances and ultimate decisions leading up to previous business successes and failures will provide insights as you choose between future strategic business options. Keep your history, as well as the values driving previous decisions, in mind as you continue to plan.

Use Worksheet 2.1: A Brief History of Our Farm Operation as a guide for writing your farm history. For now, you and other planning team members are the intended audience, so don’t be too concerned about length or writing style. The important thing is to document key events and key decisions and to reflect on how these have shaped not only your current situation, but also your dreams for the future.

Dave Minar’s history of Cedar Summit Farm shows one method that can be used to review your business and personal history (Figure 5). He simply chose to describe key events in the nearly forty years he and his wife, Florence, have been farming together. During that time, both their family and their farm 2 TASK 28 BUILDING A SUSTAINABLE BUSINESS See pages 67–86 for a complete set of blank worksheets for Task Two. ; To print a complete set of blank worksheets, go to http://purl.umn.edu/115840