--- Recommendations for Approaching Retail Buyers ---

concentrate as much management on grading and packing as on production.

Lastly, and perhaps most importantly, you will need to prove to your buyer that you are a dependable and consistent source of high-quality product.

If one of your distribution alternatives includes the wholesale market, you may want to begin your research by contacting local grocers and restaurants to find out who supplies their produce and other food products. Lakewinds Natural Foods in Minnesota, for instance, purchases approx imately 90 percent of its food items from regional wholesale distributors such as the Wedge’s Cooperative Partners Warehouse, Roots and Fruits Cooperative Produce, Blooming Prairie Natural Foods, and Metro Produce.24 Next, contact the wholesaler.

Find out their grading, packaging and delivery requirements. If they seem like a good fit—and if the prices they offer are financially acceptable—try selling yourself to them.

There are a number of resources available to help you identify and reach intermediaries. One of the best resources is the Cooperative Grocer On-line.

This site offers links to retailers, such as cooperative grocers, as well as other intermediaries, such as manufacturing cooperatives, wholesalers and distributors (see “Resources”, p. 249).

Packaging. Product or service packaging can be both functional and promotional—serving to preserve your product for shipment and, in the case of final consumer goods, to advertise and differentiate your product.

As a producer of bulk commodities, your packaging strategy may seem fairly straightforward since little or no packaging may be involved. However, if you are planning to produce specialty commodities, such as organic grains, be aware that strict industry “packaging” standards may exist.

Packaging final consumer goods for the retail market, on the other hand, can be a daunting yet exciting task. Examples of product packaging include individual product cartons, boxes and containers; bulk shipping containers; delivery vehicles; and even retail display cases for mass product packaging. (1) Become knowledgeable about the market by talking with farmers selling to retail stores. Try to find out individual buyers’ expectations of volumes and prices to see if they match your situation before approaching the buyer. (2) Prepare an availability sheet listing products and prices. Make it neat and well-organized. Make sure there will be enough produce available to back up what is listed. (3) Send the availability sheet to buyers whose expectations best match what you have to offer. Buyers often prefer to see this sheet before they talk to a producer. You can fax it to the buyer’s office. (4) Project a professional image through a growers’ manager or representative. This person should be well-informed about production, supply, produce condition, and be confident in the business’ ability to meet the buyer’s needs. (5) Work out the details of the sale with the buyer, such as volume, size, price, delivery dates and labeling requirements. Some buyers have a set of written requirements for growers. (6) Keep in touch with the buyer. Growers need to keep the buyer informed about potential problems so that buyers can look elsewhere for a product if there is a supply problem. 118 BUILDING A SUSTAINABLE BUSINESS Figure 45.

Recommendations for Approaching Retail Buyers23 23New Markets for Producers: Selling to Retail Stores, Center for Integrated Agricultural Systems, 1999. 24Personal communication, Lakewinds Natural Foods General Manager Kris Nelson, October 2001. 4 TASK