--- Dream a Future Vision ---

Dream a Future Vision You’ve chronicled a history and described your current business situation.

Now it’s time to sketch a future vision for your family and business. Your vision should paint a clear picture of how your business will function in the future, and incorporate personal values for family, community, the environment and income.

In the Introduction Worksheet: Why are You Developing a Business Plan? you identified a critical issue that motivated you to begin the business planning process. If you have ideas about how to address this issue, you should include it in your vision. For example, Dave and Florence Minar conceived of on-farm processing (prior to conducting any brainstorming or strategic planning) as a way to add value and jobs to their existing dairy business. This was their initial vision. It was the first idea that they researched and evaluated in Planning Task Four (Strategic Planning and Evaluation).

If you have identified a critical planning need but do not have clear ideas about how to address it, begin with a more personal vision for your business.

Describe what role you would like to play in the business, what you will be doing. You’ll have an opportunity to brainstorm specific marketing, operations, human resources and finance strategies in Planning Task Four.

Begin the visioning process with some brainstorming.

Ask what your farm or business will look like in five, ten, or twenty-five years. For example, what product(s) and services will you produce? Will you be working with animals or crops?

What will the landscape and community look like? What role will you play in the business? Will you be working alongside family? Will you earn all of your income from the farm? Will there be time for regular vacations?

Include your planning team and even nonteam members in the visioning process. Although Dave and Florence Minar were already considering the idea of on-farm processing, they invited 15 family members and friends from the non- farm community to their home for a visioning session.

Family and friends were divided into four groups. Each group was asked to develop “farm business ideas that will create jobs for the next generation of family members.” After an evening of brainstorming, each group came up with several new ideas ranging from the creation of a bed and breakfast/game farm to the purchase of a local creamery for ice cream production. Ultimately, the Minars rejected ideas that did not fit with their personal and environmental values, but they did 3 TASK 88 BUILDING A SUSTAINABLE BUSINESS Figure 31.

Envisioned  Northwind Nursery and Orchard Map See pages 97–101 for a complete set of blank worksheets for Task Three. ; To print a complete set of blank worksheets, go to http://purl. umn.edu/115840