--- Northwind Nursery and ---

incorporate the concept of ice cream production into their initial plan for on-farm dairy product processing.

There are many ways to communicate your future vision: as a story, a short paragraph, a picture or even a map like that created by Northwind Nursery and Orchard owner Frank Foltz.

Frank Foltz and his family agreed as part of their vision to continue selling nursery stock and farm-grown fruit in the future, but noted in his plan that “the most exciting concept we envision implementing is the experience of the farm itself.” The Foltz family drew two maps— one to reflect their current situation and one, like that shown in Figure 31, to reflect the service and tourism components of their envisioned nursery and orchard ten years from now, complete with guest cabins, a picnic area, a ball and game field, a demonstration orchard, and fruit trial areas as well as hiking, skiing and “fruit walk” trails.

Use the questions in Worksheet 3.1: Dreaming a Future Business Vision to begin developing a comprehensive future vision for your business. Be sure to involve your planning team members and remain open to new ideas. You may be surprised by what comes out of this process! Next, think about how you would like to share your vision with other family members, customers and potential investors and lenders—through a map, summary statement, story or list. Dave Minar’s Worksheet for Cedar Summit Farm is reproduced as Figure 32.

Worksheet 3.1 Choose a timeframe from one, five to ten years (or more). Revisit your values if necessary. Next, develop a description of your business and personal future. Or, if you prefer, write a story, draw a map. Dream a little! Don’t worry about the development of specific goals or action strategies—you will be setting goals and developing business strategies in the Worksheets and chapters that follow. For now, keep your vision fairly general and, if possible, address your critical planning need in some way. Remember—have each of your planning team members develop their own personal and business vision for the future. Most importantly, ask, What will our farm or business look like in one, five or ten years?

Dreaming a Future Business Vision The future looks bright! Cedar Summit Farm is still a diversified livestock enterprise after ten years. We have listened to our customers and have adjusted our product line to suit their needs.

All of our products are sold at our farm store, farmers’ markets, CSA’s, church drop-off spots, food co-ops or delivered to homes and restaurants within a 25-mile radius of the farm. Included in our product line are a large variety of dairy and meat products.

The customer base at Cedar Summit Farm has grown to the point that we must ally with neigh- boring sustainable producers. The fact that the farm is almost totally surrounded by homes has played a part in this growth. 3 TASK 89 BUILDING A SUSTAINABLE BUSINESS Figure 32.

Example from Cedar Summit Farm—Worksheet 3.1:  Dreaming a Future Business Vision