--- Agriculture (CSA), Pick Your Own (PYO) and farmers’ markets. ---

Geographic:

Segmenting customers by regions, counties, states, countries, zip codes and census tracts.

Demographics:

Segmenting customers into groups based on age, sex, race, religion, education, marital status, income and household size.

Psychographics:

Segmenting customers by lifestyle characteristics, behavioral patterns, beliefs and values, attitudes about themselves, their families and society.

Figure 37.

Market Segmentation Alternatives 15 Markets: Who are our target customers and what do they value?

Most marketing plans begin with a description of the business’ target market, or its potential customers. Your first task in building a customer strategy is to identify your target market. Target markets are most commonly characterized as either individual households or businesses.

Direct marketing to individual households or customers can be performed on a small scale. This form of marketing tends to be more profitable than business-to-business marketing because of value-added opportunities and the lack of middlemen. Most direct market products are consumer goods or services. Popular direct market opportunities include Community Supported Agriculture (CSA), Pick Your Own (PYO) and farmers’ markets.

Business-to-business marketing typically involves sales of a raw commodity or product that will be used as an input. Traditional commodity producers almost always practice business-to-business marketing where customers include grain companies, processors, packers and millers. Today’s specialty or differentiated commodity producers, however, are learning to build in more profit by responding directly to market demand for unique products, such as tofu grade soybeans, high oil corn, grass-fed livestock, organic feed, and heirloom vegetables. Don’t overlook today’s business-to-business opportunities to contract and market specialty commodities.

That said, if you plan to market a raw commodity directly to an elevator, packer or overseas broker, your marketing strategy will be very different (and presumably less intensive) than that of someone who is looking at direct marketing a differentiated product to a well-defined market of individual customers.

In order to fully define your target market and corresponding customer strategy, you will need to identify your target market segment (who your customers are and what they value) and sales potential (how much they are willing to buy). This research is critical for building your business. Marketing author Michael O’Donnell notes that one of the most common planning mistakes is failure to fully “understand the market makeup and what segment the company will concentrate on.” 14 Segmentation. Dave and Florence Minar identified “individuals” (as opposed to other businesses) as their target market for Cedar Summit Farm dairy products. This target market was very different from their customer at the time, 4 TASK 108 BUILDING A SUSTAINABLE BUSINESS 14The Marketing Plan: Step-by-Step, O’Donnell, 1991. 15Small Business Marketing for Dummies, Schenk, 2001. .......