--- Page 261 ---

Positioning: an action taken by a business to fill a meaningful and unique niche in the market.

Principal amount: the face-value of a loan that must be repaid at maturity, separate from interest.

Processing: cooking, baking, heating, drying, mixing, grinding, churning, separating, extracting, cutting, fermenting, slaughtering, eviscerating, preserving, dehydrating, freezing, dyeing, sewing, or otherwise manufacturing and packaging, including canning, and jarring, that is different from normal post-harvest packaging of crops.

Product: any commodity, finished consumer good, or service produced by the farm.

Product advertising: aims to increase sales directly and immediately for an advertised product.

Profitability: the relative profit performance of a business, enterprise, or other operating unit. Profitability comparisons occur over time, across peer groups, relative to projections, and relative to norms or standards.

Promotion: a marketing activity that aims to increase sales through specific product, image or total approach advertising. See product advertising, image advertising, total approach advertising.

Proprietorship: an unincorporated business owned and operated by a single individual.

Psychographics: customers’ lifestyle characteristics, behavioral patterns, beliefs and values, attitudes about themselves, their families and society.

Rate of return on assets (ROA): the profitability measure representing the rate-of-return on business assets during an accounting period. ROA is calculated by dividing the dollar return to assets during the accounting period by the value of assets at the beginning of the period or the average value of assets over the period.

Rate of return on equity (ROE): the profitability measure representing the rate-of-return on the equity capital that owners have invested in a business. ROE is calculated by dividing the dollar return to equity capital during an accounting period by the value of equity capital at the beginning of the period or the average value of equity capital over the period.

Records: field maps, field logs, journals, calendars, harvest, storage and sales information, animal health reports, receipts, invoices, billing statements, bills of lading, inventory control reports, production reports, facility diagrams, process flow charts, questionnaires, affidavits, inspection reports, laboratory analysis reports, meeting minutes, personnel files, correspondence, photographs, and other materials. Records that pertain to Net farm income: represents the returns to labor, management and equity capital invested in the business; what the farm will contribute to net worth growth over time. See Appendix B for net farm income calculation.

Net worth: the financial claim by owners on the total assets of a business, calculated as total assets minus total liabilities. Also called equity capital and owner’s equity.

Off-farm income: wages and salaries from working for other farmers, plus nonfarm income, for all owner operator families (whether they live on a farm or not).

Operating expenses: the outlays incurred or paid by a business for all inputs purchased or hired that are used up in production during the accounting period.

Operating loan: a short-term loan (less than one year) to finance crop production, livestock production, inventories, accounts receivable, and other operating or short-term liquidity needs of a business.

Operations structure: pertains to the competitiveness, size, organization, production and resource management of the farm business.

Organic agriculture: a holistic production management system which promotes and enhances agro-ecosystem health, including biodiversity, biological cycles, and soil biological activity; emphasizes the use of management practices over the use of off-farm inputs and utilizes cultural, biological and mechanical methods as opposed to synthetic materials.

Organic conversion: the act of establishing organic management practices in accordance with industry standards.

Organic conversion period: the time between the start of organic management and certification of the crop or livestock production system or site as organic (also called transition period).

Packer: a type of handler, such as a produce packing operation, that receives raw agricultural products and packs the products for shipping. A produce packer may also store products and apply post-harvest materials. A meat packer converts live animals to carcass meats and possibly to primal cut or boxed meat and other fresh meat forms.

Partnership: an association of two or more persons to carry on, as co-owners, a business for profit.

Pasture: land used for grazing of livestock that is under management measures designed to maximize soil fertility, provide feed value, protect the environment from degradation, and support range land health.

Glossary 260 BUILDING A SUSTAINABLE BUSINESS