--- Page 36 ---

As you describe the distribution systems you currently use for your operations, think about how well they help you preserve the unique characteristics of your product. The Minars preserve the unique qualities of their grass-fed meat by direct marketing their meat products. However, by selling their milk to the local cooperative, the Minars were losing the opportunity to reach customers who were willing to pay a premium for graziers’ milk. It’s also important to think about the costs and cost savings associated with your current system. The Minars’ distribution system for their milk was less costly than a system that involves on-farm processing and sale through local retailers or home delivery.

In general, commodity distribution systems are the least expensive, but they also offer the fewest opportunities for establishing close contacts with consumers and for adding value through unique characteristics. Direct marketing systems offer the greatest opportunity for customer contact and product differentiation, but they are often the most expensive when costs for time and transportation are added. Selling through a wholesaler or retailer—that is, connecting with your ultimate customer through market intermediaries—is sometimes an attractive alternative to the other two distribution systems. You can often keep a strong link with your customers by using distinct packaging or by doing regular in-store product demonstrations.

Also, there are clear cost savings in sharing storage, transportation, and product display costs. Most of those cost savings, however, will go to the wholesaler or retailer. In other words, when you work through an intermediary, you will need to share the proceeds of the sale to the final consumer with the retailer or wholesaler.

As you complete the “Distribution” section of Worksheet 2.2 for each of your major products, think about the advantages and disadvantages of current systems. Are there significant opportunities for reducing costs or increasing revenues by improving your current distribution system or shifting to something new? If there are, this is an area to revisit later in the planning process when you begin developing strategies for more effectively meeting the goals you set for your operation.

Pricing: How do we price our products?

The prices you charge for your products are influenced by production costs (yours and your competitors’) and by your customers’ willingness to pay. From a farmer’s perspective, it would be great to set product prices at levels that cover all costs and include a “fair” profit. However, your ability to do this will depend on the actions of your competitors and on the strength of your customers’ demand for the characteristics that make your product or service unique. You’ve almost certainly seen these market forces at work on any visit to a farmers’ 2 TASK 35 BUILDING A SUSTAINABLE BUSINESS .......