--- Develop a Strategic ---

Develop a Strategic Marketing Plan.

Think about how all of your individual product marketing ideas (product, distribution, pricing and promotion) can fit together into one or more general marketing strategies for the whole farm.

Use Worksheet 4.9: Marketing Strategy Summary to summarize your marketing research and strategies for each product and to note how these strategies and external conditions (such as competition) may change throughout your transition or start-up period. Then think about how individual product strategies fit together into one, whole-farm marketing plan. This is the time to refine your initial product strategies if necessary to incorporate new information.

The Minars completed the Marketing Strategy Summary Worksheet 4.9 for each product in their proposed cream-top product line. An excerpt from their Worksheet for bottled milk—in which they identified several pricing, distribution and packaging strategy alternatives—is shown above. Note that they still had a lot of details to work out, such as expenses associated with glass versus plastic milk cartons and the economic feasibility of on-farm sales and collaborative marketing efforts. But the beginnings of a very strong marketing plan were in place.

If you haven’t already done so, take time now to complete Worksheets 4.1—4.8 for each product that you plan to market. Refine your target market, if necessary, based on your research. Do this together with your planning team. Next, using Worksheet 4.9: Marketing Strategy Summary, briefly describe your distribution, packaging, pricing, and promotion strategies for each product and begin gathering expense estimates. Then summarize your product strategies into a whole farm strategic plan. Note any strengths, weaknesses, opportunities and threats (SWOT) associated with each general marketing plan, listing supporting evidence from your research. ch/Consultant Other Total Expenses Business Plan Input—Marketing Strategy Summary:

Our primary marketing strategy is to target health-conscious, upper middle class families with young children and people who remember traditional foods. The consumer will perceive our products as being very different from the regular dairy products in the grocery stores. Our grass-fed cows produce higher amounts of Omega-3 and conjugated linoleic acid in their milk than grain-fed cows. These two fatty acids fight cancer, promote lean muscle mass in humans, and have many other health benefits. Milk from our grass-fed cows will also be processed and marketed as non-homogenized or cream-top milk.

We plan to package our milk in returnable bottles, either glass or plastic depending on costs. It is a common perception that milk in glass bottles stays colder, tastes better, is of higher quality, and has a nostalgic appeal to many customers. We are considering several distributional alternatives in the New Prague and Twin Cities areas: (1) Home delivery; (2) retail; (3) on-farm; (4) farmer’s markets and (5) alliances. We expect that the first two distribution options will account for the bulk of our sales. By marketing locally, we hope to build name recognition, a loyal customer base, and dependable sales. Costs may clearly be a disadvantage with home deliv- ery-both in terms of packaging and the need for additional marketing staff to make regular deliveries and com- municate with individual customers. We will dominate the market in the New Prague and Twin City areas for a number of years by being the first dairy to bottle milk from grass-fed cows in returnable containers. 4 TASK 133 BUILDING A SUSTAINABLE BUSINESS Figure 58.

Excerpt from Cedar Summit Farm’s Worksheet 4.9:  Marketing Strategy Summary (side 2) ........