--- Structure of This Guide ---

Structure of This Guide This Guide is divided into five chapters—each reflecting a critical “planning task.” • Task One: Identify Values—What’s Important to You? • Task Two: Review History and Take Stock of Your Current Situation— What Have You Got? • Task Three: Clarify Your Vision, Develop a Mission Statement and Identify Goals—Where Do You Want to Go? • Task Four: Strategic Planning and Evaluation—What Routes Can You Take to Get Where You Want to Go? • Task Five: Present, Implement and Monitor Your Business Plan— Which Route Will You Take and How Will You Check Your Progress Along the Way? 12 BUILDING A SUSTAINABLE BUSINESS ......

The Four Key Management Areas: ; Marketing • Operations • Human Resources • Finance Within each Planning Task, the four key functional planning areas are addressed: marketing, operations, human resources and finances. In Planning Task One, you and your planning team (family, business partners, lenders) will identify the values that bring each of you to the table. Planning Task Two asks you and your team to document business history and take stock of your current situation. In Planning Task Three, you will clarify a future vision for your business as well as develop goals and a mission statement that reflect the values you identified in Planning Task One. Planning Task Four addresses the crux of your business plan: the development and evaluation of strategic marketing, operations, human resources and financing alternatives. Finally, in Planning Task Five you will pull everything together into a written business plan.

Within each task, you’ll find examples of completed worksheets from five of the farmers who completed business plans for their enterprises using this guide. .........

The Four Key Management Areas: • Marketing ; Operations • Human Resources • Finance ...........

The Four Key Management Areas: • Marketing • Operations ; Human Resources • Finance ..............

The Four Key Management Areas: • Marketing • Operations • Human Resources ; Finance These icons let you know which of the four key manage ment areas is being discussed in each Planning Task.

To print a complete set of blank worksheets, go to http://purl.umn.edu/115840