--- Common Presentation Pitfalls ---

5 TASK 237 BUILDING A SUSTAINABLE BUSINESS Too much detail. There is a fine line between too little and too much detail in a business plan. Minute or trivial items that dilute or mask the critical aspects of the plan should be avoided.

Graphics without substance. With the sophisticated computer software available to the average user today, it is easy to over-emphasize aesthetics while compromising substance. Graphics should be a complement to, not a substitute for, logic and reasoning.

No executive summary. Many readers of business plans will not read past the executive summary. If it does not exist, they may not read the plan at all.

Inability to communicate plan. The business plan should clearly outline the proposal in understandable terms.

Monumental ideas are worthless if they cannot be communicated.

Infatuation with product or service.

Although a business plan should clearly explain the attributes of the business’ key product or service, it should focus on the marketing plan. An entrepreneur can often become so intrigued by his or her ideas that he or she forgets about the big picture.

Focusing on production estimates. When making projections, the focus needs to be on sales estimates, not production estimates. Production is irrelevant if there are no buyers.

Unrealistic financial projections. Potential investors are certainly interested in profitability so that they earn a return on investment. However, unrealistic financial projections can cause a plan to lose credibility in the eyes of investors.

Technical language or jargon. Technical language, acronyms and jargon that would be unfamiliar to a person without experience in a particular industry should be avoided. The reader will be more impressed if he or she understands the plan.

Lack of commitment. The entrepreneur must show commitment to his or her business if he or she expects a commitment from others. Commitment is exhibited by timeliness and following up on all professional appointments. Investment of personal money is looked upon favorably because it shows that the owner is willing to make a financial commitment.

Figure 100.

Common Presentation Pitfalls74 74Business Planning—A Roadmap for Success, Wilson and Kohl, 1997.