--- Develop a Business Strategy, is where you’ll ---

Develop a Business Strategy This first step in your strategic plan, Develop a Business Strategy, is where you’ll spend the majority of your time and effort for this Planning Task. You will consider all four functional areas, and you’ll consider many variables within each of those areas.

We’ll remind you of where you are in the process from time to time. In the sections that follow, you will have the opportunity to identify and research alternative strategies for each functional area of the business—marketing, operations, human resources and finances. Begin by returning to your Whole Farm SWOT Analysis (Worksheet 2.18) to review the internal strengths of your present business and any perceived industry opportunities, as well as the internal weaknesses and external business threats you and your planning team identified. Good business strategies always take advantage of current business strengths and market opportunities. At the same time, a solid business strategy will address current weaknesses and perceived threats. With your SWOT Analysis in hand, you are ready to begin developing specific marketing, operations, human resources and finance strategies for the business.

Marketing Strategy The marketing component of your business strategy will determine, in large part, the success of your business. As marketing consultant Barbara Findlay Schenck said: “Without customers, a business is out of business.”13 Your marketing strategy is about defining your customer or target market and tailoring your product, pricing, distribution and promotion strategies to satisfy that target market. Marketing experts warn that businesses that are product oriented—those that try to sell what they can produce without first looking at customers’ needs—risk developing a product that won’t sell. Instead, most successful businesses are customer oriented—they design marketing strategies around the needs of their customers. 4 TASK 106 BUILDING A SUSTAINABLE BUSINESS Dave and Florence Minar seated at the kitchen table with FBM consultant Ira Beckman 13Small Business Marketing for Dummies, Schenk, 2001.

The Four Key Management Areas: ; Marketing • Operations • Human Resources • Finance .......

Gigi DiGiacomo