--- Resource Gaps: How will we fill ---

Referring to your completed Worksheets 2.5 and 2.6, use Worksheet 4.12: Describing Potential Crop Production Systems and Worksheet 4.13: Describing Potential Livestock Production Systems to record future resource needs for crop and livestock enterprises, respectively. Think about how your operating schedule and corresponding resource needs will change as you transition into a new management system over a period of seasons or years.

Resource Gaps: How will we fill physical resource gaps?

Another critical component of your operations strategy involves your plan for filling resource gaps. Return to your crop and livestock production schedules (Worksheets 2.5 and 2.6) from Planning Task Two in which you described current crop and livestock input needs and equipment use.

Compare these lists to those that you completed for future operations (Worksheets 4.12 and 4.13). Are there any gaps? Or perhaps you now have underutilized resources?

Consider some of your strategy alternatives for filling or eliminating gaps between current land, building, machinery and equipment availability and future physical resource needs. Will you: • Make better use of existing machinery and equipment? • Acquire additional (new or used) resources? • Gain access to additional resources through business arrangements (formal and informal)?

Making changes in your current resource use may mean making “better” use of underutilized resources. Based on your evaluation of current resource availability and future needs, are there any resources that are underutilized or that will become underutilized as you move toward your future vision? If so, one of your resource management strategies might be to “make better use of underutilized resources.” How you define “better” will depend on your values and goals. For example, it may mean sharing or renting out equipment with another family member or neighbor.

If the gap between current resource availability and future resource needs is significant, you may need to look at acquiring additional physical resources. This can be a financially risky alternative. You will need to carefully evaluate cash flow in the next section before implementing your plans. For now, however, consider the following acquisition options if you think additional capital will be needed to meet future operating needs. on, education and wildlife accord below, describe any gaps between current resource avail strategy for meeting or filling future resource needs. Wil purchase or rent additional resources (new or used)? Or or contracting services? List your acquisition strategy alte Enterprise Resource Needs:

Acq Land Buildings Machinery and equipment Breeding livestock Supplies Processing Milk 1.5 acres for processing plant/building site 4,800 square-foot concrete block building with infrastructure Full line of Pladot Mini-Dairy processing equipment (or equivalent) plus: 1. Standby generator 2. Walk-in freezer and cooler 3. Bottle washer 4. Boiler 5. Transport tank 6. Raw milk storage (2,000+ gallons) 7. Bottle conveyer 8. Computer and accounting software 9. Office furnishings and phone 10. Hand sinks 11. Washing machine and softener 12. Refrigerated delivery truck 1. Milk 2. Cups 3. Bottles 4. Delivery crates 5. Labels 139 BUILDING A SUSTAINABLE BUSINESS Figure 63.

Excerpt from Cedar Summit Farm’s Worksheet 4.14:  Resource Needs and Acquisition 4 TASK