--- of the Land Stewardship ---

Establish Monitoring Checkpoints.

Next, develop a list of monitoring checkpoints.

Monitoring checkpoints, also called “critical success factors” and “objectives,” are those key events or accomplishments that must occur for your business to succeed. They measure progress and act as “early warning”signals that alert you to when, where, and how your goals and plans may need to change. In this way, note authors of the Land Stewardship Project’s Monitoring Tool Box, “monitoring can act as a springboard for finding creative ways to adapt your management.” 76 Monitoring checkpoints are typically more detailed than your goals for the whole farm and are based on a shorter time frame.

Monitoring checkpoints can be specific production targets, sales objectives, profit goals, wildlife counts, or whatever measure of success is important to you and your planning team.

Frank Foltz, owner of Northwind Nursery and Orchard, summarized monitoring checkpoints for his business into two- and five-year time frames.

His checkpoints, reproduced above, should be easy to monitor as Frank and his family implement their plans.

Worksheet 5.3 Briefly describe your plans for checkingin with your planning team to track and evaluate business progress.Then, list monitor ing checkpoints for the business as a whole and for each functional business component.

Check-In Schedule Whole Farm Checkpoints Marketing Operations Human Resources Finance Monitoring Within two years: Have full-time orchard and propagation manager. Have an on farm sales room and part-time sales staff in place. Have another two acres of orchard fruit planted.

Within five years: Meet our financial goals. Have the farm ‘experience’ operations, such as camping and picnic sites, trails, and fruit walks. Settle into a routine that will be enjoyable, sustainable, and reproducible. 5 TASK 240 BUILDING A SUSTAINABLE BUSINESS Figure 103.

Example from Northwind Nursery and Orchard—Worksheet 5.3:  Monitoring 76The Monitoring Tool Box, Ahlers Ness (ed.), 1998.