--- a Pladot equipment representative. Look ---

holiday season, the Minars budgeted extra staff time to handle on-farm customer sales. Similarly, their financial staff needs are expected to increase at year- end and prior to tax reporting. Product promotion and delivery workloads are expected to remain fairly constant throughout the year, as will time needed to process products. Staff needs may increase as the Minars reach full processing capacity in 2004. Labor estimates for plant staff are based on conver sations with other on-farm processors and a Pladot equipment representative. Look at the Minars’ completed Worksheet 4.18: Tasks and Workload for Cedar Summit Creamery’s processing enterprise and begin to develop your own labor and staff estimates.

Skills: What skills will be required to fill workforce needs?

Before you begin to develop a strategy for filling workforce needs, you should get a good feel for the type of skills required for each new task or position. This information, combined with workload estimates, should help you better decide how to fill your human resources needs.

Begin your research by learning more about any new work that you and others will be required to do. Ohio State University economist Chris Zoller recommends developing “well thought-out job descriptions” that are compatible with the business’ mission and goals for each new position that will be created.46 Job descriptions—even for those positions that will be filled internally with family labor—can help make your human resources strategy a positive one by clearly identifying desired skills, expectations, responsibilities and compensation. A sample job description form is included in Appendix C to help you with this task.

As part of their “skills” research, Dave and Florence Minar pitched in at Minnesota Organic Milk (MOM’s)—an on-farm processing plant located in Gibbon, Minnesota (Figure 71). They worked on the MOM’s processing line one afternoon to help with butter production and packaging. Based on this experi ence and their visits to other on-farm dairy processing plants around the country, the Minars developed a good feel for future workloads and tasks. Consequently, they felt confident developing a realistic strategy for meeting some of their future labor needs. Explore similar opportunities as you begin identifying tasks. Try to get a feel for skills that may be required for each task.

Use Worksheet 4.19: Filling Workforce Needs to begin describing the skills that are required for each new task or position. 4 TASK 148 BUILDING A SUSTAINABLE BUSINESS Figure 71.

Florence Minar (left) working on the Minnesota Organic Milk (MOM’s) processing line.

Dave Minar 46Filling a Position in the Farm Business, Zoller, 1997. .......