--- As discussed in Planning Task Two (History and Current Situation), the ---

4 TASK 175 BUILDING A SUSTAINABLE BUSINESS Solvency: Will this new strategy lead to growth in net worth?

When implementing alternative plans you will frequently need to plan for the purchase of additional equipment, machinery, buildings or land. You may plan to sell machinery, land or breeding livestock. Alternative plans that involve these types of capital investments and sales will change the balance sheet and, therefore, the solvency position of the business when they have been implemented.

As discussed in Planning Task Two (History and Current Situation), the balance sheet is a summary of the business’ assets and liabilities at a specific point in time. Your assets, liabilities and possibly net worth as reported on the balance sheet will change significantly with major investment changes (purchases, expansions and reorganizations).

Preparing Worksheet 4.35: Projected Balance Sheet will help you work out the impact of your alternative business strategies on equity or future net worth growth. Complete Worksheet 4.35 using either cost or market asset valuation (whichever you used in Planning Task Two). Record “new investments,” “capital sales,” and “liabilities” for your base plan and each whole farm alternative. When doing so, include only the “one-time” changes necessary to move from the base plan to the alternative under consideration. These one- time changes may include the purchase or sale of machinery, buildings and land as well as new investments67 in breeding stock beyond current numbers (including herd sires and additional replacements). Do not include machinery and equipment replacements that are necessary to maintain the existing operation.

Moreover, do not include purchases of breeding livestock used to replace cull animals. This Worksheet is only for one-time purchases that are necessary to implement an alternative business plan.

How much equity will your strategy alternative generate in the future compared to your base plan? If your business strategy does not return the level of profit and equity desired or if it cannot service debt, return to your expense estimates, output projections and price forecasts. Is there another alternative you previously ruled out that may be worth reconsidering? The Minars, for instance, could have re-evaluated their plan substituting used equipment for the more expensive, new equipment package had their initial plan failed to cash flow.

Is there something you can do differently?

On the other hand, if your strategy appears financially healthy—it yields the profit and equity that you desire and can service debt in a timely manner—then you are ready to shock the analysis. See what happens to your financial picture when market prices decline or input expenses increase. In other words, run through a quick risk analysis of your proposed strategy. 67New investments must be financed by the proceeds from asset sales, through increased liabilities or by withdrawals from cash accounts.

Funds generated from asset sales must be used either to finance new investments, reduce existing liabilities, or to build cash accounts.