--- Food Labeling Fact Sheet ---

4 TASK 119 BUILDING A SUSTAINABLE BUSINESS Service packaging examples include business cards, invoices, landscaping, building design, signage, brochures and vehicles.

As a producer of consumer products, you may want to begin your research at the supermarket or grocery store. Make note of how similar products are packaged and labeled. There are many rules and regulations governing food packaging and labeling. In general, any product packaged for the retail market must include a description of the common product name, net weight, nutrition facts, ingredients and your business address. All products must meet federal regulations. However, you should also contact your state’s food inspection department for more details, since state guidelines may be stricter than federal guidelines. [In Minnesota, see the MDA’s Food Labeling Fact Sheet.

The Agricultural Utilization Research Institute (AURI) also provides technical assistance for the development of nutrition labels (see “Resources”, p. 249)].

Finally, as a service provider, think about what your customers will see, hear and smell when visiting your farm or communicating with you and your staff.

Northwind Nursery and Orchard owner Frank Foltz laid out the following plan for “packaging” the service component of his business: “The sales room for nursery stock and fruit will be decorated with a country theme and include locally crafted items useful for gardening, orcharding and homesteading purposes. We will avoid all but the very highest quality products. Staff will be friendly and knowledgeable in all aspects of fruit growing and orcharding. The property will be developed in a free-flowing, park-like fashion with an interspersion of fruit trees and edible landscaping plants that will elevate our customers from the simple act of buying fruit or nursery stock to that of experiencing our natural environment at its best. This arboretum-type setting will provide customers with the opportunity to take a ‘fruit walk’ to sample many different fruit cultivars in season and subsequently purchase more fruit, or the nursery stock to grow their own.” As you think about what type of packaging is best suited to your product, don’t overlook customer needs, such as convenience, and intermediary requirements. Restaurant owners and cooperative grocery managers will likely have minimal packaging requirements that affect how you clean, bundle and grade your product. Lakewinds Natural Foods General Manager Kris Nelson says produce farmers, in particular, must compete with major distributors and therefore deliver a professionally packaged product. “Kale and other greens come to us from farmers already cleaned and bundled,” Nelson says. “They are dropped off at the store in packaging that is similar to what we see from commercial distributors.”25 If you plan to market to retailers and other intermediaries, research their packaging requirements and think realistically about your ability to meet industry standards. 25Personal communication, Lakewinds Natural Foods General Manager Kris Nelson, October 2001. .......