--- Financial Assistance Options for ---

the opportunity to gradually build your business assets through
partnership with a retiring farmer in your community. Retiring
producers sometimes are willing to transfer their assets in
exchange for sweat equity. Minnesota’s Passing on the Farm
Center offers a service to link retiring farmers with beginning
farmers (see “Resources”). Check with your local Extension
service to see if your state has a similar program.
You should also carefully consider your values and how
they pertain to issues of control, cost, risk and maturity. Each
of these financial issues are described in Figure 82.
There are many state and federal government programs
available to help you finance or defer some of the start-up and
long-term development costs associated with everything from
new business development to natural resource and wildlife
habitat improvement. The Natural Resources Conservation
Service (NRCS), for example, offers cost-share payments as
part of its Environmental Quality Incentives Program (EQIP)
available to farmers who convert to organic production. Your
local Extension office can help you determine whether or
not EQP and other state and federal cost-share programs
are appropriate based on your current farm resources and
management goals.
4
TASK
162
BUILDING A SUSTAINABLE BUSINESS
Parental or family financing. Parents or other
family members directly assist with financing
through the gifting of assets or by providing
down-payment money for land purchases.
Local banks. Local banks, with whom your
family has a good working relationship, can be
an excellent source of financing.
State government financing. In Minnesota, the
Minnesota Rural Finance Authority (RFA) has
established several programs to assist beginning
farmers, including a low-interest and institution-
backed land, machinery and breeding livestock
purchase program.
Federal government financing. The Farm
Service Agency (FSA) of the USDA offers direct
and guaranteed farm ownership and operating
loans. FSA often works with beginning farmers
who don’t qualify for conventional loans due to
insufficient resources.
Control. How much control and independence do you want to have in the decision-making
process? Many small businesses use internal equity as their major source of finances to maintain
control and autonomy. This desire for control may hinder their ability to branch out into more
unconventional methods of agricultural financing.
Cost. Which method of resource control will come at a lower cost? The standard comparison
here is between lease and purchase options. But there are several other options including such
methods as shared ownership and outside equity financing. Look beyond traditional ownership
costs to include administrative and legal costs, taxes and licensing fees when evaluating financing
opportunities.

Risk. Each financing method comes with its own level of financial risk. Some will expose you to
claims on income from partners and investors. Others will place claims on the assets of your
business, which may change the size and speed of your equity growth. Still others could open you to
certain legal liabilities such as liability for the debts of business partners. And there is the final risk of
failure, which can be influenced by the financial structure and method of financing that you choose.
Maturity. Some financing and business structures are short-term in nature and relatively easy to
change or dissolve. Others, such as a corporate structure, are more permanent and can be very
costly to dissolve. When selecting a finance strategy, consider the importance of business liquidity
versus permanence.
Figure 81.
Financial Assistance Options for
Beginning Farmers
Figure 82.
Financial Strategy Issues64
64Planning the Financial/
Organizational Structure of
Farm and Agribusiness Firms:
What Are the Options?,
Boehlje and Lins, 1998
(revised).
.....