--- New Prague families ---

grass-fed cows). Moreover, New Prague families will also be purchasing a service: home delivery. This service required research and a pricing strategy just like all of the other products offered by Cedar Summit Farm.

Another way to look at your product is in terms of its uniqueness. What makes your product truly unique? Why would customers prefer your product to another farmer’s?

Are there differences in the production process that make it more wholesome and fresh? Can you appeal to the environmentally conscious? Try to look down the road a bit as you profile your product. Will there be new opportunities to add value through processing, packaging, and customer service? How might your product line or services change over time? Use Worksheet 4.3: Product and Uniqueness to describe each of the products that you plan to offer, why they are unique, and how they may change in the future.

Worksheet 4.3 Complete this Worksheet for each major product you plan to produce. Describe your product and why it will appeal to each market segment. Begin by noting industry trends and general market conditions. Describe supply and demand market trends for this product. Discuss whether they are shortterm fads or longterm, emerging trends. Note perceived market ing opportunities that may exist locally, regionally, nationally or internationally. Include evidence that supports your ideas.

Then, describe the unique features that distinguish this product within the marketplace. For which customer segments are these unique features important? How easily could competitors imitate these features?

Product and Uniqueness Product:

Industry Trends/Changing Market Conditions:

Characteristic 1 Appeals to which segments?

Easy for competitors to imitate?

Yes/No Characteristic 2 Appeals to which segments?

Easy for competitors to imitate?

Yes/No Characteristic 3 Appeals to which segments?

Easy for competitors to imitate?

Yes/No Summarize the unique characteristics of this product and why it is valuable to your target market:

Dairy market prices have been fluctuating dramatically since 1996 when federal policies were changed. We have seen our prices move around a lot at Davisco - this year’s milk price will drop by $2.00/cwt. We believe there are value-added opportunities in the natural foods retail industry as consumer demand for healthy prod- ucts grows. Every time there is a food scare, for instance, we see our meat sales rise because customers prefer to buy meat from a known source. We think that the same opportunities exist for dairy products.

Bottled Milk From grass fed cows Retail and home delivery customers No Non-homogenized, cream-top Retail and home delivery Yes Locally produced and processed Retail and home delivery customers No Our target market is health conscious, upper middle class families with young children and people who remember traditional foods.

Our grass-fed cows produce a different product. Grass-fed cows produce higher amounts of Omega-3 and con- jugated linoleic acid in their meat and milk than grain-fed cows. These two fatty acids fight cancer, promote lean muscle mass in humans and have many other health benefits.

Our dairy products will be seen by food retailers as a way to add new products to their stores, thereby adding new customers who are willing to pay more for nutritious products. The cooperative food store managers are excited about adding cream-line milk in returnable glass bottles to their dairy case. Their customers and our home delivery customers will perceive this product as being the ultimate in taste, quality, health and sustain- ability. 4 TASK 113 BUILDING A SUSTAINABLE BUSINESS Figure 41.

Example from Cedar Summit Farm—Worksheet 4.3:  Product and Uniqueness