--- For example, Riverbend ---

Prioritize Goals.

Once you are comfortable with the collective business goals identified by you and your planning team, you are ready to begin prioritizing. Few businesses or families have enough resources to reach all of their goals at one time.

Prioritized goals “provide clear guidelines for management decisions.”11 For example, Riverbend Farm owner Greg Reynolds’ goal, “to take a couple of weeks off in the summer,” may seem modest, but it is one that he and his family identified as a priority. Summer is typically the busiest time of year for Riverbend Farm since it specializes in vegetable production and Greg rarely has time away from the business during this season.

Therefore, Greg’s business strategy—to hire additional labor—was built around his critical planning need (labor shortages) and one of his top goals (to have time off during the summer).

This task of prioritizing your goals won’t necessarily be easy since many goals may overlap or conflict. The Minars, for example (Figure 36), envisioned building a processing plant in order to reach their family goals. This idea, however, conflicted with a financial goal to reduce their debt load.

The idea here is to identify which goals are most important to your family and for your business—to determine which goals are worth pursuing even if they prevent you from reaching other goals. Worksheet 3.5: Prioritizing Goals includes questions to help you with this task.

Worksheet 3.5 Use the questions below to prioritize goals for your family and business. Remember high priority goals need not receive all of your attention and resources; priorities are not permanent. Simply use this worksheet as a starting point for family discussions and planning in the chapters to come.

Prioritizing Goals (A) Which goals are most important for family well-being and for business success? (B) Which short-term goals, if attained, would help you achieve long-term goals? (C) Which short-term goals conflict with or impede your long-term goals? (D) Which goals are so important that they should be attained even if it prevents you from reaching other goals? (E) List your top five goals by priority. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5.

Our goals to provide employment, improve the landscape, reduce debt, and control income fluctua- tions are all important for our family’s well-being. Goals to process on the farm, market top-quality dairy products, support the local community, improve the landscape, and mitigate price fluctuations, are all important for the business to succeed.

If we build the processing plant and are able to secure markets for our products, all of our other goals become possible.

Our goal of processing on the farm will prevent us from reducing our debt load in the short-run - in fact, we will have to take on more debt to reach this goal. In the long run, however, we hope that by processing on the farm and building markets, we will be able to reduce our overall debt load from current levels while accomplishing other long-term goals that are a priority for our family.

Doesn’t really apply to us.

Provide employment for any family member who wishes to join the operation.

Reduce income fluctuations and/or reliance on milk commodity prices.

Process on the farm - add value.

Market fresh, top-quality meat and dairy products.

Support the local community. 3 TASK 95 BUILDING A SUSTAINABLE BUSINESS Figure 36.

Example from Cedar Summit Farm—Worksheet 3.5:

Prioritizing Goals 11Goal Setting for Farm and Ranch Families, Doye, 2001.