--- Pladot. Start-up and ---

Dave and Florence Minar obtained certified bids for new processing equipment directly from the Israeli manufacturer, Pladot. Start-up and annual operating expense estimates for items like bottles, crates, flavorings, labor and labels came from business plans shared by other on-farm processors and regional suppliers.

The Minars also spoke with local processor Mike Hartman, owner of Minnesota’s Organic Milk (MOM’s) about the cost and availability of local processing supplies.

Once you’ve secured realistic cost estimates, you can properly allocate direct (variable) and overhead (fixed) expenses for the whole farm. Knowing your costs and your cost structure will improve your overall knowledge of the operation and will prove invaluable as you make decisions over time. The difference between direct and overhead expenses as well as a method for allocating overhead expenses among enterprises is explained in Figure 86.

Try to break down your costs between annual direct or variable expenses (those costs that vary with production volume) and annual overhead or fixed expenses (those costs that will be incurred no matter how much you produce).

One time start-up costs may be prorated as fixed expenses when developing long-term income projections and as intermediate expenses in your first-year cash flow.

Use Worksheet 4.30: Annual Operating Expenses for the Whole Farm to record and total your annual variable costs and fixed expenses for each whole-farm strategy alternative.

Worksheet 4.29 Ask yourself if each of the marketing, operations, human resources, and finance strategy alternatives you’ve identified are com- patible as a system. If you are considering more than one functional strategy (such as two marketing strategies or two finance strategies), be sure to explore on paper how these different strategies will affect the business as a whole. How will they affect other functional areas of the business? Rule out those strategies that are not compatible with one another or your business vision as a whole. Then, use the space below to name one or more system-wide business strategies for your whole farm and describe, in one to two paragraphs, how each strategy addresses your critical planning needs, vision, mission and goals.

Summarize a Whole Farm Strategic Plan of Action Whole Farm Strategy Alternative # 1:

The idea of processing milk from grass-fed cows using the new Mini-Dairy equipment package and family staffing all seem compatible as a system and will, we believe, fulfill our primary planning pur- pose: the creation of jobs and income for any family member who wants to join the operation.

Although our plan to use new equipment from Pladot will be more expensive, the training and product recipes (provided by Pladot) will enable us to market a full line of products - something that we feel will enhance our ability to reach our projected sales volume and secure future markets. 4 TASK 165 BUILDING A SUSTAINABLE BUSINESS Figure 85.

Example from Cedar Summit Farm—Worksheet 4.29:  Summarize a Whole Farm Strategic Plan of Action