--- “Unique Characteristics” section of Worksheet ---

characteristic is difficult for competitors to imitate, but other producers in their area can offer locally produced meat products.

As you complete the “Unique Characteristics” section of Worksheet 2.2, ask whether the unique characteristics of your products appeal equally to all the market segments you serve. A product attribute that is important to one group of customers may be irrelevant to others. This is a good time to think about product features that appeal most to each customer segment. Even if your product or service is not strong in delivering those features, your business plan may focus on ways you can improve your operation to make your product more appealing to market segments with good growth potential.

Distribution: How do we distribute our products?

Distribution is the work of getting products from your farm to your customers. A distribution system is described in terms of the logistics— processes used to store and transport the product, the places where the product is sold, and the market intermediaries that help facilitate the flow of your product. In broad terms, most farm product distribution systems can be grouped into three categories: • Sale of a commodity product to a first handler or processor—for example, sale of grain to a local elevator, milk to a creamery, or hogs to a slaughter plant. • Sale through a grocery wholesaler or retailer—for example, sale of processed, packaged chickens through a local retailer, sale of a branded pancake mix through a natural foods distributor, or sale of fresh vegetables through a natural foods cooperative. • Direct marketing—for example, sale of fresh produce at a roadside stand, sale of farm-produced cheese at a farmers’ market, or catalog sales of bare- root nursery stock.

Of course, within each of these categories there is an endless range of variation for specific products.

Dave and Florence use direct marketing for their meat products, with simple logistics and no intermediaries. Their direct costs for market access and travel to the farmers’ market are modest, but it’s important to note that they also use about 10 hours of valuable labor time each week. It’s also interesting to note that most of their distribution costs are linked to sales at the farmers’ market, while most of their sales appear to be on-farm. Of course, their presence at the farmers’ market may be their best way to make first contact with potential customers for on-farm sales. 2 TASK 34 BUILDING A SUSTAINABLE BUSINESS