--- Minnesota Institute for Sustainable Agriculture ---

3 BUILDING A SUSTAINABLE BUSINESS Minnesota Institute for Sustainable Agriculture This publication was developed through the Minnesota Institute for Sustainable Agriculture’s (MISA) Sustainable Agriculture Information Exchange program, a clearinghouse of sustainable agriculture information and materials in Minnesota. MISA is a partnership between the University of Minnesota Extension and College of Food, Agricultural and Natural Resource Sciences and the Sustainers’ Coalition, a group of individuals and community-based, nonprofit organizations. MISA’s purpose is to bring together the agricultural community and the University community in a cooperative effort to develop and promote sustainable agriculture in Minnesota and beyond.

Other publications in the Sustainable Agriculture Information Exchange series include:

Collaborative Marketing: A Roadmap & Resource Guide for Farmers Dairy Your Way: A Guide to Management Alternatives for the Upper Midwest Discovering Profits in Unlikely Places: Agroforestry Opportunities for Added Income Hogs Your Way: Choosing a Hog Production System in the Upper Midwest Local Food: Where to Find It, How to Buy It Marketing Local Food Minnesota Guide to Organic Certification Minnesota Soil Management Series Poultry Your Way: A Guide to Management Alternatives for the Upper Midwest Resources for Beginning Farmers: Building a Sustainable Future Whole Farm Planning: Combining Family, Profit, and Environment For more information on this series, the Information Exchange, or MISA, contact: Minnesota Institute for Sustainable Agriculture, 411 Borlaug Hall, 1991 Buford Circle, St. Paul, MN 55108-1013; (612) 625-8235, or toll- free (800) 909-MISA (6472); Fax (612) 625-1268; misamail@umn.edu; www.misa.umn.edu.

Sustainable Agriculture Research and Education (SARE) SARE is a national grants and outreach program working to advance sustainable innovation to the whole of American agriculture. SARE is part of USDA’s National Institute of Food and Agriculture (NIFA). Grants are administered by SARE’s four regional offices. Learn more about SARE’s grant opportunities and library of books, bulletins and online resources at www.sare.org. For general questions about the program, contact info@sare.org or (301) 453-5339.

Funding for this project was approved by the Minnesota State Legislature and the Energy and Sustainable Agriculture Program of the Minnesota Department of Agriculture.

Center for Farm Financial Management The Center for Farm Financial Management at the University of Minnesota cooperated in the development of this publication. The Center’s mission is to improve the farm financial management abilities of agricultural producers and the professionals who serve them through educational software and training programs. Contact: Center for Farm Financial Management, University of Minnesota, 130 Ruttan Hall, 1994 Buford Avenue, St. Paul, MN 55108; (612) 625-1964 or toll-free (800) 234-1111; cffm@umn.edu; www.cffm.umn.edu.