--- Worksheet 2.10: Likely Changes in Our Human Resources ---

Now that you have described your current human resources situation, spend some time thinking systematically about how that situation may change in the next year, five years or ten years.

Worksheet 2.10: Likely Changes in Our Human Resources Situation poses questions about three of the most common and most significant human resources changes in farm operations. The first two questions focus on people who will be leaving or joining the operation and the opportunities and challenges created by these changes. The third question focuses on a difficult issue in many family farming operations—the transfer of managerial responsibilities from one person to another.

One or more of these questions may be relevant for your operation—or you may face some other important human resources change. Careful attention to potential changes, whatever they may be, will help you clarify the issues that need to be addressed by your business plan.

Worksheet Likely Changes in Our Human Resources Situation 2.10 Use this worksheet to describe likely changes in your human resources situation over the next year, five years or ten years.

Current Workforce:Will anyone who currently works in our operation be leaving for other work or for per- sonal reasons? What activities/enterprises will this affect?

Future Workforce:Will any new people be joining our operation? What new knowledge and skills will they bring? Do we have enough physical and financial resources for them to be fully employed and appropriately paid?

Future Management: Do we foresee a change in the allocation of decision-making and management responsibilities?

We don’t foresee anyone leaving the operation.

Several of our children would like to join our operation. They are:

Mike Minar: has worked with processing equipment and is currently attending boiler operations school.

He has excellent supervisory skills. He would like to become a full-time employee of the farm.

Dan Minar: has a business degree, good people skills and a general working knowledge of our current operation. He would like to become a full-time employee of our farm business.

Laura Ganske: has very good people skills and has worked with the public. She would like to work part- time on marketing and administrative issues.

Merrisue Minar: has professional bookkeeping experience and enjoys working with people. She would also like to work part-time on marketing and bookkeeping.

Currently, we do not have the financial resources to hire any of our children on a full- or part-time basis.

We would like to shift some of the general farm management to our current business partner. Paul Kajer, and eventually pass on all responsibilities to our children when we retire. 2 TASK 50 BUILDING A SUSTAINABLE BUSINESS Figure 18.

Example from Cedar Summit Farm— Worksheet 2.10:  Likely Changes in Our Human Resources Situation .......