--- Size and Capacity: How much ---

Size and Capacity: How much
can we produce?
Your goals for growing or contracting the business as well as upper and lower
limits on size will affect your choice of business organization (discussed next
in the Finance Operation Strategy section) and your operations schedule. Farm
size refers to the amount of land in production (number of acres), the number of
animals you raise, and the value of gross income from the business. Someone who
is planning to convert from a traditional cattle finishing operation to management-
intensive grazing, for instance, may be limited in size during the transition period
while pastures are developed and management techniques fine-tuned.
How will you size the business and plan for any growth? Begin your research
with a little number crunching to determine realistic production estimates for
each future enterprise and production schedule. Use information about the
future carrying capacity of your land, the processing capacity of your equipment,
boarding capacity of your Bed and Breakfast, or harvesting capacity of your
family and staff to develop output projections. Use Worksheet 4.15: Institu
tional Considerations to help you think through any legal or regulatory
agreements or policies that will affect the use and management of physical
resources under your new operations strategies.
Historical information about yield performance and productivity are available
for traditional enterprises from a number of resources. Check with your local
Extension office or your state Department of Agriculture. In the Upper Midwest,
check out FINBIN43 and Farm Business Management’s Annual Report.44 Again,
alternative production system information might be a little harder to find, but
your local Extension office or state Department of Agriculture should be able
to give you some ideas of who to contact in your area if they don’t have that
information. Check also with sustainable agriculture organizations in your area
or your regional SARE office. One of your most useful resources may be other
farmers—those who are on the cutting edge—using a new production system or
technology.
As you develop output/production estimates, particularly for
alternative enterprises with little recorded performance history,
you may want to estimate “best” and “worst” case production
scenarios, or high and low output projections. Organic crop
producer, Mabel Brelje chose to develop high and low yield
projections for her oilseed and grain crops as shown in Figure 67.
She used these projections in her financial analysis to evaluate
profitability and risk.
Dave and Florence Minar developed an upper limit for bottled milk production
based on pasture acreage, herd productivity, and equipment capacity. At current
productivity levels and herd size, the Minars’ cows produce 166,913 pounds of
4
TASK
143
BUILDING A SUSTAINABLE BUSINESS
Crop Yield Projections
Crop
Yield/Acre

High
Low
Alfalfa
Six Tons
Three Tons
Soybeans
55 bushels
30 bushels
Wheat
50 bushels
30 bushels
Corn
150 bushels
100 bushels
Figure 67.
Excerpt from Mabel Brelje’s
Business Plan—Crop Yield
Projections
43FINBIN database (online), Center for Farm Financial
Management, 2002.
44Farm Business Management Annual Reports, Crop
Information, 2002.
........