--- Production and Management: How will we produce? ---

Operations Strategy
With a clear idea of who will buy your product and why, the next planning
question you must answer is: How will we produce it? A detailed operations
strategy—one that is clear to all involved in the operation—is necessary
for sound management and is sometimes an institutional necessity. Organic
producers, for example, are required to submit a detailed farm management plan
when seeking certification each year. According to certification guidelines, the
plan must describe all resource management strategies directed at improving
soil fertility; controlling weeds, pests and disease; managing manure; and
limiting erosion.37
In this section you will have the chance to develop a production
management and operations strategy by answering questions about:
•
Production Management: What production/management alternatives will we
consider? How will we produce?
•
Regulation and Policy: What institutional requirements exist?
• Resource Needs: What are our future physical resource needs?
•
Gaps: How will we fill physical resource gaps?
•
Size and capacity: How much can we produce?
• Storage and Inventory Management: How will we store inventory and
maintain product quality?
Production and Management: How will we produce?
All operations strategies begin with a detailed description of
the business’ production (management) system and a production
schedule. As a current producer, you may have very clear ideas about
how you would like to produce, what management system to use and
resource requirements. If so, this portion of the planning process may
be a welcome break from the research that was necessary to learn
about your customers and competition in the previous section. If you
are a beginning farmer, however, you may find that this component
of the planning process is just as research-intensive. Take your time,
and, most importantly, talk with other experienced farmers when
fleshing out the details of your production system and production
schedule.
4
TASK
134
BUILDING A SUSTAINABLE BUSINESS
37Organic Certification of Crop Production in
Minnesota, Gulbranson, 2001 (revised).
4Develop a Business Strategy
;Operations Strategy
Production and Management

System

Schedule
Regulations and Policy
Resource Needs
Resource Gaps
Size and Capacity
Develop a Strategic Operations Plan
The Four Key
Management Areas:
• Marketing
; Operations
• Human Resources
• Finance
.......