--- Evaluate Strategic Alternatives ---

Evaluate Strategic Alternatives
You know what you’re going to market, who’s going to buy it and why,
how you’re going to produce it, and where your finances will come from. The
next question is, will your business actually make it? Will you accomplish your
personal and environmental goals, cover costs, generate the income needed to
cover family living expenses, service debt, and build equity in the long run?
The evaluation process can be as sophisticated and comprehensive as you
like, and there are a wide range of helpful tools available. This Guide presents
just a few tools here to help you study whether your whole farm strategy is
financially feasible.
4
TASK
166
BUILDING A SUSTAINABLE BUSINESS
Direct expenses. Direct or variable expenses typically
include annual crop inputs (such as seed, soil amendments
and crop insurance) and livestock inputs (feed, pasture
maintenance, veterinary expenses) as well as any hired
labor, utilities, fuel, interest on operating (12-month) loans,
and equipment repairs. In addition, your estimate of variable
costs should include product-specific marketing expenses.
Direct input expense estimates are available for a
wide range of traditional Upper Midwest crop and
livestock enterprises from the Center for Farm Financial
Management’s website, or for other crops from the USDA
National Agricultural Statistics Service’s Agricultural Prices
publication (see “Resources”). However, if you plan to
produce a specialty crop, use an alternative livestock
management systems or offer a highly specialized service,
you may have to do a little more digging to develop
realistic cost estimates. Talk with other farmers, Extension
educators and farm business management consultants,
as well as equipment and input dealers to begin putting
together cost estimates for organic seed, livestock fencing
and watering systems, and other inputs for which price
histories do not exist.
Overhead expenses. Overhead or fixed expenses include
permanent hired labor (including your own labor and that
of other family members), machinery and building leases,
farm insurance, dues and professional fees, utilities, and
advertising.
When estimating the value of machinery and equipment,
be sure to include capital ownership costs such as
depreciation, interest, repairs, taxes and insurance
estimates rather than the cost of capital itself. Your
interest, repairs, taxes, and insurance rates will vary
considerably. However, depreciation is fairly standard and
can be easily calculated.
Calculating Depreciation. Straight-line depreciation, in
which an asset is depreciated annually in equal amounts
over the asset’s projected life, is commonly used for farm
machinery and equipment. The straight-line depreciation
formula, listed below, can be used when estimating the
depreciation value of machinery and equipment for your
overhead cost analysis. In the example below, taken from
Barry, et al., a new tractor worth $30,000 is depreciated
equally over ten years.65 The tractor’s salvage value at the
end of the ten-year period is $2,000. Using the straight-
line calculation, a depreciation charge of $2,800 should be
added to the interest, repair, tax, and insurance costs of
the tractor for annual enterprise accounting purposes.
Depreciation Formula:
Depreciation Example:
D = (OC – SV) / N
D = (30,000 – 2,000) / 10

D = $2,800
Where:
OC = original cost
OC = cost of new tractor,

$30,000
SV = salvage value
SV = value of tractor after

10 years, $2,000
N = asset’s expected life N = book life of tractor,

10 years
Figure 86.
Allocating Whole Farm Expenses
65Financial Management in Agriculture,
7th Edition, Barry, et al., 2002.