--- What do I consider ---

• Helping neighbors who are farming. • Creating a beautiful landscape and environment. • Working outdoors with livestock. • Generating ____ % of my income from the farm.

Or, try to identify specific personal, economic, environmental and community values. Ask yourself: • What type of life do I want to lead? (personal) • What do I consider financially important? (economic) • What role does the environment play in my life? (environmental) • How do I define community and why is it important? (community) Goat-cheese producer Mary Doerr of Dancing Winds Farm, for example, thoroughly explored her values in the context of personal, economic, environmental and community sustainability. She included a full values description in her business plan.

Use Worksheet 1.1: My Values to think about and define your values.

You may decide to write a comprehensive Worksheet My Values 1.1 Think about your values and list them in the space below. Consider what it means for you to be “successful” in farming, or try distinguishing between personal, economic, environmental, and community values. If you are having trouble putting values onto paper, try drafting a brief essay. Begin by recalling a critical turning point in your life when you were faced with a seri- ous tradeoff:What values guided you?

Personal Values:

Economic Values:

Environmental Values:

Community Values:

I value good health - physical, emotional and spiritual - and work to keep those in good balance.

One’s health is truly a very precious commodity. I live with allergies and asthma, and it may sound obvi- ous, but if can’t breath nothing else matters. It’s important for me to get good nourishment (mind, body and soul), exercise regularly, and get enough rest. I value my relationships with people: family, loved ones, friends and community. I believe that it is important to be authentic, honest, and understanding with oth- ers and to try to help make a positive difference in this world. I want to continue to grow and learn, respect life, value its diversity and work for justice, equality, environmental protection, and a safe, afford- able food system. I value travel - it is always good to explore and see how others live. It is an education unto itself. I value the philosophy of letting others live as they will. It is a basic human right, I believe, to be free to live and love as you choose ... without fear of persecution or discrimination.” I value living modestly. I try to practice wise management of my financial resources and carry no debt- load beyond my mortgage at this time. I want to make an honest living. I enjoy producing and promoting quality goat products and providing friendly hospitality to my guests.

I believe in leaving my environment better than how I found it. I strive to be a good steward of the land, trying to help maintain and enhance soil, water, and air quality through sustainable farming prac- tices. I plant trees every year on the farm. My philosophy is to take the long view when making business decisions that will impact the farm’s environment - trying to imagine that impact seven generations into the future ... We need to pay attention to our actions and care about all forms of life on this planet, even the forms we cannot readily see.

It’s important for me to try to be part of the solution, not part of the problem. I want to make a positive difference in my community and be a good role model for other young women who may have an interest in sustainable farming. I will support the local economy as much as I can, realizing that this effort, in itself, helps sustain the community.

I 1 TASK 21 BUILDING A SUSTAINABLE BUSINESS Figure 3.

Example from Dancing Winds Farm—Worksheet 1.1:  My Values