--- Whole Farm SWOT Analysis ---

Whole Farm SWOT Analysis You have now nearly completed a major task of your business plan. Having analyzed the history and current situation of your business with respect to marketing, operations, human resources and finances, you have assembled facts, figures and qualitative impressions about all aspects of your operation.

Now you will use that information in an analysis of your Strengths, Weaknesses, Opportunities and Threats—a SWOT analysis. This can be helpful in defining and clarifying the issues you need to address in the rest of the business planning process.

Remember that in identifying strengths and weaknesses, you will be focusing on factors that are internal to your business. Opportunities and threats refer to the external environment for your business. As noted earlier, the strategy and implementation plan you develop will be shaped by both internal and external factors. Ideally, your business plan should help you build on and further develop your strengths, while minimizing the impacts of your weaknesses, if not eliminating them. At the same time, your plan needs to be responsive to the opportunities and threats your environment offers.

Use Worksheet 2.18: Whole Farm SWOT Analysis to summarize the most important strengths, weaknesses, opportunities and threats for your business. In completing their SWOT analysis, the Minar family identified their expertise in grass-based milk production and direct marketing skills, as well as their children’s interest in returning to the farm, as major strengths. They considered the increase in urban development and rapidly growing demand for grass-based milk as major opportunities. On the other hand, they considered volatile commodity milk prices and the possibility that someone else would capture the local market for grass-based milk as the most important threats facing their business. The Minars considered the addition of a milk processing enterprise because it would build on their strengths in milk production and direct marketing, and the new enterprise would employ younger family members. It was a response to an attractive opportunity, but a quick response was needed to take advantage of that opportunity. 2 TASK 64 BUILDING A SUSTAINABLE BUSINESS