--- Preparing the Values Section of ---

1 TASK 23 BUILDING A SUSTAINABLE BUSINESS Preparing the Values Section of Your Business Plan Values are very personal statements about you, your family and other planning team members. If this plan is for internal use, then it may be important to include a good description of your values, like that of Dancing Winds Farm owner Mary Doerr, (Figure 3) in your final written plan. If your plan is primarily for external use, however, then you probably want to include a succinct values statement, like that written by Dave and Florence Minar, Figure4) in your business plan.

The most important thing to remember is to write about what you feel is important. You can always trim or revise your values statement to use in a written plan once you’ve settled on a whole farm business strategy and outline.

Worksheet Common Values 1.2 Use the space below to identify common or shared values among your planning team members.You may want to begin by simply listing the values identified by each team member and then determine what values you share as a team. If you are uncomfortable sharing personal values, focus on the environmental, finance and community values that you share.

Values Identified by Individual Planning Team Members:

Values That We Share as a Planning Team: - Human health - Animal health - Christianity - Financial stability - Open communication - Healthy soil and water - Beautiful landscape - Community relationships We value health, Christian values, trust, and open communication. Because our health is directly tied to the health of the environment, we strive to produce healthy dairy and meat products by utilizing sustain- able methods in their production. We value preserving our forests and grasslands for future generations to enjoy. It is important to be a contributing member of the community both socially and economically. Our community values the esthetic beauty of seeing farm animals on the land.

Figure 4.

Example from Cedar Summit Farm— Worksheet 1.2:  Common Values