--- the Supplementary Material. ---

Soil Security 13 (2023) 100119 3 to 100 as highest soil quality’ and average sum of annual rainfall). In the main part, three questions addressed the importance of soil fertility (now and in the future), motives for agronomic investments in soil fertility, and related positive agronomic effects and improved soil properties. Furthermore, participants were asked for the criteria or methods that they used to assess the fertility of agricultural soils. In the following section, the participants were asked to provide recommen dations of agronomic measures for soil fertility promotion; in addition, farmers were asked if these measures were already implemented on their farms. At the end of the questionnaire, an assessment of demands from science/authorities/advice was included and a closing remark could be made. The questions were primarily multiple-choice, with multiple and single responses, and rating questions based on a three/four-point Likert scale. In addition, five questions included free-text fields for additional comments and remarks. The full questionnaire is provided in Table S1 in the Supplementary Material.

At the end of the study period, the total number of returned ques tionnaires was 929. Responses were received from individuals belonging to the following professional groups: farmers (n = 498), private agri cultural consultants (n = 117), agricultural office/Ministry of Agricul ture/Chamber of Agriculture (n = 81), research institutions/universities (n = 154), agricultural associations (n = 24), and other/not specifies (n = 55). The participants were divided into two groups: (1) farmers and (2) agricultural institutionalists, which included all other subject-related occupational groups. After reviewing the questionnaires to assess their reliability, completeness, and coherence, the number of acceptable questionnaires decreased. Reasons for this included the presence of non- plausible answers, unrealistic responses, or incompletely answered questionnaires. This resulted in a final approved sample size of 585 fully answered questionnaires considering the responses of 370 farmers and 215 agricultural institutionalists. This represents a response rate for farmers of < 1 % (0.14 %) based on the number of farms (257 thousand) in Germany. For the directly invited farmers and agricultural in stitutionalists, a response rate of 64 % could be assumed in relation to the number of invitations sent out (direct mailings).

At the beginning of the survey, the participating farmers were asked to provide some details about their on-farm conditions, including the prevailing soil texture class, soil quality index (or score), and average sum of annual rainfall. The provided information can be summarized and categorized as follows: Regarding the general soil texture class (number of responses n = 290), 22 % of the farmers reported having soils with mainly light texture (sandy soils, loam-sandy soils), 69 % with medium/heavy texture (sand-loamy soils, loamy soils), and 9 % with heavy texture (clay-loamy soils, clay soils). The farmers surveyed were also asked to specify the average soil quality index/score of their managed soils (number of responses n = 351). The soil quality score, which ranges from 0 to 100 points (highest soil quality), is a measure of long-term soil quality and provides a rough estimate of the local crop yield potential (BGR 2013). Of the total farmers, 28 % graded their soils of poor quality, with a soil quality score range of 18–39 (Ø 31; n = 100), while 37 % estimated their soils to be of medium quality within a soil quality score range of 31–49 (Ø 48; n = 130). Soils of high quality, with a score range of 60–90 (Ø 71; n = 121), were reported by 35 % of farmers.

With respect to the average sum of annual rainfall (mm) (number of responses n = 283), responses ranged from 242 mm to 1300 mm, where Ø 673 mm was calculated as the annual average precipitation over all farmers. A total of 14 % of respondents stated having less than 500 mm, 48 % reported having 500–700 mm, 26 % responded with 701–800 mm, and 12 % reported having more than 800 mm of annual average precipitation.

Data were prepared descriptively using Excel (2019, version 16.63.1 macOS). Bivariate analyses with Spearman`s correlation were used to describe the dependencies between farmers’ ratings/assessments and their on-farm site conditions (two co-variables were included: soil quality index and average sum of precipitation). These analyses were performed using the IBM SPSS Statistics 23 software (IBM Corporation, New York, NY, USA). The analysis of the comments written in the free- text fields is presented in both the results and discussion sections.

The survey was presented exclusively online to achieve a high participation rate and comparability of the results. However, it should be noted that the results include subjective information provided by the respondents and are not generally valid due to limited statistical representativeness. Further critical points of online surveys include testing environments that are not transparent for the interviewer and problems with higher drop-out rates (Couper, 2000). On the other hand, faster processing, lower costs, and the possibility of a more accurate summary of the results are considered positive factors for online surveys.

Overall, the advantages of a web-based empirical study reaching a large nationwide target group using a single interviewer and providing a broad dataset outweigh the possible risks mentioned above (Gosling et al., 2004).

Results Present and future importance of soil fertility in agricultural crop production The first question on the survey targeted the importance of soil fertility in agricultural crop production. Respondents were asked to distinguish between the importance of soil fertility ’at present’ and ’in the future’ (Table 1). Almost half of the farmers (49 %) stated that soil fertility was very important at present, while about one-third (31 %) stated that it was important. Similar results were found amongst agri cultural institutionalists, with 32 % choosing ’important’ and 47 % choosing ’very important’. The similarity of these results between the different occupational groups was confirmed by a significant correlation (R = 0.72; p < 0.05). None of the farmers and only 1 % of the in stitutionalists indicated that soil fertility was unimportant, while 8 and 9 %, respectively, abstained from answering (Table 1). When answering this question with respect to the future, a significant increase in the relevance of soil fertility was detected amongst both farmers and in stitutionalists. amongst farmers, the perception of very high relevance increased to 69 %, while it increased to 66 % amongst institutionalists. A significant correlation (R = 0.93; p < 0.05) was found for the relation ship between the farmers’ and institutionalists’ ratings of soil fertility importance in the future. The changes in perceptions are shown in a cross table (Table 2), including the ratings from all respondents (farmers and agricultural institutionalists). This comparison underlines the increasing importance of soil fertility as we move into the future. Spe cifically, 18 % of the respondents changed their ranking from ’impor tant’ in the present to ’very important’ in the future, while the other ratings (less important, unimportant, and not specified) remained nearly constant (Table 2). In the bivariate analyses, farmers’ ratings regarding the present and future importance of soil fertility showed no significant dependence on their stated on-farm conditions, including the soil quality index and average sum of annual rainfall (Table S2 Supplementary material).

Table 1 Ratings of farmers and agricultural institutionalists regarding the present and future importance of soil fertility.

Rating Present importance of soil fertility Future importance of soil fertility Farmers (%) Institutionalists (%) Farmers (%) Institutionalists (%) Very important Important Less important Unimportant 49 31 12 0 47 32 11 1 69 13 10 0 66 14 11 0 Not specified 8 9 8 9 All participants included (n = 585, 370 farmers and 215 agricultural institutionalists).

M.K. Wolf et al.