--- 3. Conservation Agriculture (CA) for Improved and Sustained Soil Quality, Crop Production and ---

Agronomy 2020, 10, 605 4 of 16 Figure 1. Runoﬀloss as aﬀected by conventional tillage and no tillage with or without residue removal under two rainfall intensities in Zaers region [22].

Globally, erosion rates range from a low 0.001 t/ha/year on relatively ﬂat land with grass or forest cover, to rates ranging from 1 to 5 t/ha/year in mountainous regions with natural vegetation.

In croplands, however, global estimates for soil erosion ranges from 0.5 to 400 tons/ha/year and averages to approximately 30 tons/ha/year [1]. The numerous soil problems are further exacerbated by the seasonality and erratic distribution of rainfall, which results in varying periods of dry spells separated by wet periods [26]. Soil erosion and soil moisture loss are two major issues that need serious consideration when dealing with degraded soils especially in semi-arid regions as well as projects attempting to rehabilitate deserted or abandoned lands [13]. The loss of soil sediments (fertile top soil) together with runoﬀwater is attributed to unstable soil structure due to drought and mostly, to erratic or erosive rainfall caused by climate change. Thierfelder et al. [18] states that “Conservation Agriculture (CA) is a key approach to address declining soil fertility and the adverse eﬀects of climate change in southern Africa, however, CA alone is often not enough, and complementary practices and enablers are required to make CA systems more functional for smallholder farmers in the short and longer term.” 3. Conservation Agriculture (CA) for Improved and Sustained Soil Quality, Crop Production and Food Security Out of the global land mass of 13.2 billion ha, only 1.6 billion ha is currently in use for the cultivation of agricultural crops. Global population is projected to reach about 8.5 billion by 2030 and therefore an additional cropland of 81 to 147 million ha will be needed to meet global food demands [4]. Food and Agricultural organisation (FAO) estimates that by 2050, the demand of new croplands due to population pressure (of about 9.5 billion people), diet change and demand for biofuels is expected to reach approximately 3.2 billion ha, mostly at the expense of grasslands, forests and rangeland ecosystems. Shahid and Al-Shankiti. [27] further states that “By 2050, rising population and incomes are expected to result in a 70 percent increase in global demand for agricultural production”. Gomiero [4] warns, “Concerning the future, we must take into account the potential eﬀect of climate change on