--- 2. Indicators for Circular Regenerative Agricultural Practices in African Food ---

Agronomy 2024, 14, 2423 3 of 15 economic sustenance among the communities involved. To achieve this, we used regenera- tive agriculture and circular agriculture as our inclusion criteria to generate literature that provided information about these two practices in African agriculture. The information generated was eventually organized into four main study areas, namely (i) indicators for circular regenerative agricultural practices in African food production systems, (ii) oppor- tunities and challenges in embracing circular regenerative agricultural practices in Africa, (iii) interlinkages between circular agriculture, the circular economy and sustainable soil management in selected countries and (iv) the restoration of soil health through circular regenerative agricultural practices, with selected examples for extensification in Africa. 2. Indicators for Circular Regenerative Agricultural Practices in African Food Production Systems Agricultural production (both crops and livestock) and the industrial processing of agriproducts are the two main aspects of the food production industry in Africa. Activities that promote circularity in agriculture are, therefore, embedded into these two production categories, i.e., farming and agroprocessing. For the farming subsector, circular agriculture practices may include those that are aimed at improving the soil fertility, practices that aim at controlling or managing pests and practices that minimize the effects on the ecosystem and the environment.

Mixed farming—a system of farming that exists where both livestock and crop pro- duction take place within the same locality and where the ownership of crops or land and livestock is integrated—is widely practiced in Africa. Mixed farming has been reported in all parts of the continent. In Ethiopia, which is second only to Uganda in terms of livestock density [8], most of the subsistence farming is mixed farming [9]. Similar practices of mixed farming practices are reported for many other parts of Africa, including Tanzania [10], Botswana [11] and South Africa [12].

Crop rotation is another common practice that enhances the soil fertility under the circular agriculture system. Crop rotation is encouraged in circular agriculture systems because of its power to enhance the soil fertility and decrease nitrogen losses [13]. Crop rotation is also known to fight weeds and prevent them from becoming dominant in a farm. This is because the variations in cultural practices that occur with each rotation tend to disrupt the life cycle of each weed species, although it also tends to create niches for a greater variety of plant species in this ecosystem. Crop rotation is practiced in many parts of Africa, most notably in sub-Saharan Africa. Cereals, especially maize, are the most dominant crop types in most crop rotation systems in Africa. The practices embraced in different countries are presented in Table 1.

Table 1. Circular agricultural practices used in different countries in sub-Saharan Africa.

S/N Category of Practice Name of Practice Countries/Regions Where Commonly Practiced References 1 Agronomic practices Mixed farming East Africa, West Africa, South Africa [14] Horn of Africa (Ethiopia) [9] Crop rotation Nigeria, Malawi, Zimbabwe, Ghana, Cameroon, Kenya, Benin, Burkina Faso, Mozambique, South Africa [15–17] Agroforestry Tanzania, Kenya, Uganda, Ethiopia, Malawi, Madagascar, Nigeria, Ghana, Niger, Zambia, Zimbabwe, Burkina Faso, Mali, Senegal, Burundi, Rwanda [18–20] Certified organic agriculture Tanzania, Burundi, Kenya, Egypt, South Africa, Ethiopia, Tunisia, Sierra Leone, Congo, Burkina Faso [21,22]