--- IRECRP has been very effective at helping Moldova’s National Commission for Financial Markets draft regulations ---

29 higher vulnerability to extreme climatic events, unpredictable climate variations and environmental degradation caused by climate change. IRECRP has been designed to address the impacts of climate change and identify the adaptation priorities of the Moldovan government for the agriculture sector.

Description IRECRP is the sixth IFAD programme in Moldova. The programme builds on previous IFAD investments in conservation agriculture, value chain development, infrastructure, financial services and capacity building. The programme aims at improving the ability of the rural poor to cope with the vagaries of climate change and increasing economic volatility.

The climate change resilience and inclusive value chain development component of IRECRP is designed to contribute to the creation of an enabling policy environment (CSA action point 2) by triggering a policy process to boost the adoption of conservation agriculture (CA). This is to be achieved by mainstreaming CA into rural development planning, supporting small-scale private agro-forestry investments, enhancing institutional capacities and improving the policy environment for climate-resilient agriculture and soil protection. In the current stage of the programme, policy engagement in CA remains marginal; however, efforts are being made to meet the programme’s targets.

IRECRP has been very effective at helping Moldova’s National Commission for Financial Markets draft regulations on licensing for saving and credit associations and establish internal procedures for identification, recordkeeping and risk management in this sector.

IRECRP aims inter alia to strengthen stakeholders’ capacities to mainstream climate change adaptation activities, such as for example the planting of shelterbelts (CSA action point three). To this end, workshops and study tours are organized. So far, the programme’s overall success at building the capacities of national institutions to mainstream CA and climate change activities has been limited. However, the programme has reportedly exceeded its targets for the training on climate-resilient agriculture of farmers and farmers’ organizations (mainly through FFS). A set of recommendations on training, awareness raising on climate change adaptation and mitigation, and the mainstreaming of climate change is expected to improve the technical knowledge of the personnel of national institutions and of project staff. These capacity building activities are expected to be continued and strengthened by the upcoming IFAD programme for Talent Retention for Rural Transformation. This programme aims to further strengthen in-country capacities for the promotion of climate-resilient and CA through the development of a national CA curriculum, the creation of scholarships, research, consultations and dissemination of key lessons, with a strong focus on smallholder farmers.

IRECRP improves farmers’ access to financial services by giving out small grants for the procurement of climate- resilient agricultural equipment (CSA action point 4). In the context of Moldova, where farming is subject to a gradual process of consolidation and commercialization, the programme has successfully targeted smallholders with a combination of grants and loans, which are relevant to smallholders. In addition, by supporting savings and credit associations and focusing on young entrepreneurs, IRECRP has been able to target the relatively smaller farmers among smallholders.

Outcomes IRECRP contributes to multiple SDGs. The development goal of the programme is to enable poor rural people to raise their incomes and strengthen their resilience (SDG 1), promote inclusive rural economic development and create employment (SDG 8). The programme promotes CA practices to regenerate soils (SDG 15) and climate- smart irrigation techniques to strengthen farmers’ resilience and capacity to adapt to climate-related hazards and natural disasters (SDG13).

Overall, IRECRP has exceeded its targets in terms of the number of beneficiaries reached and the involvement of women. IRECRP has brought more than 26 000 ha of land under climate-resilient practices (CSA action point 5) and helped nearly 9 000 smallholder household members cope with the effects of climate change. At the end of 2019, IRECRP had brought 104 ha of farmland under sustainable irrigation, thereby reducing the vulnerability of the agricultural supply to natural hazards.