--- by the Caribbean Agricultural Research and Development Institute (CARDI) between January and December ---

77
Saint Lucia − advancing the use of information and
communication technology solutions for climate-smart
agricultural practices
Introduction
The project discussed in this case study investigated and addressed the needs and challenges of farmers as to the
sustainable production of food under climate change in Saint Lucia. ICT was selected as an appropriate tool to ensure
the availability of locally produced food in the country. The adoption of ICT strategies can increase agricultural
productivity and thus directly contribute to a nation’s resilience by providing food security. The use of ICT along
with the adoption of good agricultural practices can help reduce GHG emissions. The project was implemented
by the Caribbean Agricultural Research and Development Institute (CARDI) between January and December
2019, with funds provided by the Japan-Caribbean Community (CARICOM) Friendship and Cooperation Fund.
It was supported by Saint Lucia’s Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries, Physical Planning, Natural Resources and Co-
operatives. The project supports the Ministry’s Seven Crop Project for import substitution.
Rationale
Saint Lucia regularly experiences drought conditions during the dry season, with farmers in some areas being
particularly affected. Many farmers cease to produce during the dry season. Irrigation systems tend to be operated
manually, and generally consist of drip or shower irrigation lines fed by nearby rivers. This situation contributes
to inconsistencies in the production of vegetable crops in Saint Lucia and affects market demand and supply. In
addition, market information is not used to schedule crop production. The result is fluctuations in the availability
of products. The aim of the project was to confirm and address these suspected challenges facing farmers in Saint
Lucia. Two reoccurring challenges observed at farm level were:

the absence of crop scheduling in function of seasonal and climatic conditions, as well as cultural festivals
and activities; and

the absence or inefficient use of irrigation technologies.
©CARDI/ Shivani Dawn Seepersad