--- Linking to SDGs ---

75 to accelerate the development of up to six priority climate-smart agricultural value chains. The AMMAR project has mainstreamed a climate-smart approach throughout its activities, with support from the GEF grant. Under Component 1, the project screened and prioritized product value chains that are expected to offer sustainable comparative advantages under future climate change scenarios, especially at the primary production level. The project has also promoted investments in efficient irrigation technologies, CA systems, the construction of windbreaks as a targeted landscape restoration measure, soil erosion control measures in sensitive farmland areas and the rehabilitation of irrigation schemes to create sustainable improvements in water-efficient irrigated production. The project has contributed to the widespread adoption of climate-smart good agricultural practices and technologies at the farm level.

Under Component 2, CSA technologies for improved water and soil health are transferred to the beneficiaries.

Technology has been transferred and promoted at the village level through a combination of CSA demonstration plots, promotion events, short and longer practical field training and systematic follow-up with farmers by the local service providers delivering the training. CSA demonstration plots enable farmers to directly access know-how, training and networks of service and credit providers, and thus facilitate the adoption of the promoted technologies.

They also allow interested farmers to get an objective farmer perspective on the technologies from the progressive farmers on whose land the CSA demonstration plots are established.

Outcomes Implementing practices at field level The AMMAR project promotes CSA practices by establishing demonstration plots in collaboration with selected lead farmers. Data on demonstration plots recorded by lead farmers and service providers help assess the economic benefits and impact of the demonstrations. The project organizes exchange visits to demonstration plots to promote good practices across Georgia. In 2020, more than 3 135 ha of land were brought under climate-resilient practices; of this total, more than 2 800 ha were improved with windbreaks. More than 14 300 ha of land (including more than 8 480 ha below the Iakublo dam) benefitted from new-built or rehabilitated water-related infrastructure.

Enhancing financing options The project promotes access to financial services through its small grants. By 2020, 733 small grants to smallholders had been approved. The project strives to address the needs of economically active smallholder farmers through its grants. Unlike for other grant facilities implemented in Georgia by other development agencies, there is no minimum threshold to apply for a grant under the project; the project thus manages to attract even small investors. Grants proposed by the AMMAR project resonate very well with youth: they enable youth to implement new business ideas that they had in mind and but couldn’t realize.

Supporting the creation of enabling policy frameworks Based on the experiences regarding CSA, including the construction of windbreaks, and until the completion of the project, the AMMAR project is providing support for the elaboration of windbreak management plans (based on international best practices) and enforcement packages to strengthen Georgia’s existing legal and policy framework on windbreaks and soils. These plans and packages will provide an incentive for the further elaboration of the country’s laws and projects.

Strengthening national and local institutions The AMMAR project organizes training of trainers in efficient irrigation technologies and CSA technologies.

These training sessions target service providers and regional staff of the Ministry of Environmental Protection and Agriculture. These activities have now reached their target of training more than 50 trainers, who improved their capacities and abilities to support the implementation of the project on the ground.

Linking to SDGs The development goal of the project is to sustainably increase incomes and reduce poverty for women and men