--- Management Agency and the Marketing Unit of the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries, Physical Planning, Natural ---

78 Description The project aimed to teach farmers how to interpret the demand for food during festivals such as Jounen Kweyol (Creole festival) and carnival and schedule their production accordingly. It also aimed to improve irrigation techniques and increase the efficiency of irrigation systems by promoting the use of mobile applications and adjusting traditional drip line irrigation methods; by doing so, the project aimed to reduce the degree to which agricultural production is affected by climate change. Additionally, soil mapping and risk assessments were conducted on farms in Saint Lucia to guide farmers in their decisions as to what commodities to plant, based on farms’ susceptibility to floods and landslides.

The project enjoyed a highly supportive enabling environment. Data were provided by the Water Resource Management Agency and the Marketing Unit of the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries, Physical Planning, Natural Resources and Co-operatives, as well as by the Saint Lucia Meteorological Office. This allowed CARDI to analyse 15 years’ worth of climate and marketing data to demonstrate trends at farm level. It also allowed CARDI to showcase trends in market demand and supply based on cultural and other festivals and on weather data, thereby expanding the evidence base on agriculture in Saint Lucia (CSA action point 1). Farmers, officers of the Ministry of Agriculture, technicians and students in agriculture of the local college (Sir Arthur Lewis Community College) participated locally in the project, thereby strengthening their capacities. Regionally, officials from the ministries of agriculture of Antigua and Barbuda and the Commonwealth of Dominica, Grenada, Montserrat, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia and Saint Vincent and the Grenadines also received training, which contributed to institutional strengthening (CSA action point 3). The final workshop of this project was carried out over two days, with one full day being organized in a FFS setting. This allowed for practical demonstrations and hands-on learning by farmers on the setting up of automated irrigation systems and the efficient use of irrigation systems with buried or surface irrigation lines. It is hoped that these FFS demonstrations and training sessions will facilitate the implementation of CSA practices at field level (CSA action point 5).

Outcomes The project provided an avenue for the improvement of agriculture in Saint Lucia and the other members of the Organisation of Eastern Caribbean States (OECS).

The project introduced a crop scheduling application that allows farmers to develop and follow production schedules. Farmers improved their understanding of market trends linked to seasonal climatic changes and the occurrence of cultural festivals. As a result, farmers are now equipped to increase their crop production by effectively and systematically scheduling their crops based on the demands of the market. Farmers are also better equipped to produce food to reduce their country’s food import bills. This outcome has the potential to improve the availability of food for the local and regional population, and thus contributes towards the goal of achieving zero hunger (SDG 2).

The project also examined climate data, which are relevant to market intelligence for crops, and especially vegetables.

The examination of climate data facilitated improvements in water use efficiency in farming. One example was the use of automated irrigation systems that are controlled via mobile devices during wet and dry seasons. The successful adoption of these technologies contributes towards the goal of climate action (SDG 13).

Overall, the project contributed to climate action by mapping farms in Saint Lucia according to their risk of landslides, floods and other hazards, which directly affect Life on land (SDG 15) and have an impact on the (agricultural) activities that persons can conduct in their communities. A WhatsApp group was created under the project to exchange information between regional and local stakeholders. This group grew to include participants from farming communities, OECS ministries of agriculture, CARDI, the University of the West Indies, the Inter- American Institute for Cooperation on Agriculture, the OECS Commission, and California State University, Fresno.

As such, the project contributed towards Partnerships for the Goals (SDG 17).