--- collaboration with CIAT, Root Capital and the Sustainable Food Lab, and funded by CCAFS. ---

41 Ghana – developing training capacity for climate-smart agriculture in cocoa Introduction Ghana is one of the world’s largest producers of cocoa, and over 4 million farming households rely on the crop as their main source of income (Lowe, 2017). Besides providing employment, the production of cocoa brings many other economic benefits for Ghana. The impact of climate change on cocoa production therefore constitutes a real threat to the country’s economy. Indeed, climate change and climate variability are already having a significant impact on smallholder farming in the Ghanaian cocoa belt. New measures that can address those impacts need to be defined, and cocoa farmers should adopt site-specific climate-smart practices that can be implemented quickly and effectively. Scaling up CSA efforts requires engaging with multiple actors to understand how climate change is expected to impact specific sites and develop according responses.

From 2015 until 2019, the Rainforest Alliance implemented a project to promote the adoption of CSA practices by cocoa farmers in the world’s leading producer countries, including Ghana. The project was implemented in collaboration with CIAT, Root Capital and the Sustainable Food Lab, and funded by CCAFS.

Rationale The overall goal of the project was to build a foundation for the scaling up of pathways to create more resilient agro-ecosystems and livelihoods by enabling farmers to produce more cocoa while adapting to and minimizing the impact of climate change and reducing GHG emissions.

Together with the harvesting of timber, the production of cocoa plays a crucial role in Ghana’s national economy and forms the basis for the livelihoods of millions of smallholder farmers. However, these activities continue to drive deforestation and land degradation, which add to the threats created by climate change. With demand for both timber and cocoa on the rise, climate-smart landscape approaches (e.g. agroforestry) are needed to secure the future of Ghana’s forests, improve livelihood opportunities for farmers and forest users, and secure long-term resource security for the private sector. The promotion of such approaches requires the creation of a results-based, multi-actor governance model through which the government, the private sector, civil society and local communities can collaborate and establish a business case for private sector investment. Interventions to date have demonstrated which approaches and tools are effective at increasing farm productivity, making agriculture and forest production systems more resilient, and reaping opportunities that generate significant and lasting biodiversity, socio-economic and institutional benefits. However, these approaches and tools need to be developed further and adopted across landscapes to achieve results at a wide scale and promote self-governance. © Rainforest Alliance /Martin Noponen