--- Page 9 ---

vii
Executive summary
Addressing climate change and transforming agri-food systems are key to meeting the Sustainable Development
Goals (SDGs). With nearly 690 million people around the world facing hunger today (FAO et al., 2020), agri-food
systems emitting one third of global anthropogenic GHG emissions (Crippa et al., 2021) and a growing public
demand for climate action, it is pressing to achieve food security while adapting to - and mitigating - climate
change. Climate-smart agriculture (CSA) has grown from a concept into an approach implemented throughout
the world, by all types of stakeholders. This publication describes climate-smart agriculture case studies that apply
the five action points for CSA implementation. The action points are: 1) expanding the evidence base for CSA,
2) supporting enabling policy frameworks, 3) strengthening national and local institutions, 4) enhancing funding
and financing options, and 5) implementing CSA practices at field level.
The five action points were created by the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) as
a methodology for implementing the climate-smart-agriculture approach at a national scale. These action points
provide the structure for this publication.
The case studies discuss context-specific activities that contribute to CSA’s three pillars: sustainably increasing
agricultural productivity and incomes, adapting and building resilience of people and agri-food systems to climate
change, and reducing and/or removing greenhouse gas emissions where possible. Many of the case studies pay
special attention to smallholder farmers, including women and indigenous groups, who are particularly affected by
the impacts of climate change.
A diverse group of stakeholders contributed case studies, reflecting the importance of coordinating national-level
CSA activities, for example by including research findings in policymaking processes, and leveraging public sector
funding to attract private sector investment. The publication provides examples of the innovative roles that farmers,
researchers, government officials, private sector and civil society actors can play to transform agri-food systems and
help meet the SDGs; it also demonstrates how these actors can collaborate.
Key messages:

Results under the three pillars of CSA are best achieved through a comprehensive strategy, such as the five
action points approach highlighted in this publication.

The five action points of the CSA approach are all crucial to effectively implement CSA; they have been
applied in various contexts to achieve results under the three CSA pillars.

Not all projects need to focus on all five action points. In addition, the action points are not necessarily
consecutive actions, but rather actions that may or may not be undertaken at the same time; ideally, they
reinforce each other to create an enabling environment. For example, a robust evidence base should
support enabling policy frameworks, national and local institutions, funding and financing options, and
the implementation of CSA practices at field level. Each of these actions may in turn generate valuable
knowledge that feeds back into the evidence base.

Knowledge sharing and working with diverse partners is essential for all five action points, as the sum of
the knowledge and practices of various partners is larger than its parts.

Regarding action point 1, building the evidence base for CSA, the case studies confirm that the linkages
between agriculture and climate change are site-specific. Analysis based on site-specific findings may
therefore lead to the selection of different climate-smart agricultural practices for different sites.

On action point 2, supporting enabling policy frameworks, the case studies show that governments are
already working to operationalize their approach to agriculture under climate change, working with partners
at the regional, national and provincial levels.