--- Innovation Partnership Operational Groups to create ---

26 Italy – working with stakeholders in European Innovation Partnership Operational Groups to create climate-smart innovations in Emilia-Romagna Introduction This chapter discusses a recent study by the Institute for BioEconomy (IBE) of the National Research Council of Italy (CNR) that assessed how and to what extent the Italian region of Emilia-Romagna supported local initiatives promoting the adoption of CSA practices from 2014 until 2020. Italy is a forerunner in terms of agri-food excellence.

Emilia-Romagna is one of the country’s main production regions of high-quality foods, as well as a region where policymakers support innovative ideas and activities.

An important objective of CSA strategies is the development of locally acceptable solutions that increase agricultural productivity and incomes in a sustainable manner, adapting agricultural practices to climate change and reducing their emissions. The second pillar of the European Union’s Common Agricultural Policy, the Rural Development Policy, creates possibilities for specific research into CSA innovation. Under Measure 16.1 of this Rural Development Policy, support is provided for the establishment and operation of operational groups (OGs) of the European Innovation Partnership. OGs aim to develop multidisciplinary solutions or identify new opportunities to improve agricultural productivity and sustainability through new techniques, processes, products and technologies. One of the main innovative aspects of the OGs is that they involve an array of stakeholders (including farmers, researchers, advisers and business representatives) who work together to achieve a common goal.

Rationale The study undertaken by IBE aimed to assess to what extent the investments made by the region of Emilia-Romagna under Measure 16.1 helped local stakeholders promote and adopt CSA practices. As a first step, the study identified and categorized the main threats caused by climate variability and change. Eight types of threats were identified, including soil deterioration, water scarcity, the deterioration of water quality, shifts in vegetative seasons, the spread of pests and diseases, extreme weather events and increases in GHG emissions due to intensive livestock management practices. Then, 93 projects financed under Measure 16.1 were analysed to identify which projects demonstrated climate-smart properties and assess the inclusion of CSA in the region’s rural development programme. The projects were then categorized based on the solutions they provided to the aforementioned threats. © CER- Consorzio di Bonifica Canale Emiliano Romagnolo