--- Page 55 ---

45
Botswana is an arid country, and only 5 to 6 percent of its arable land is deemed suitable for agriculture. Nevertheless,
over half of the country’s population is based in rural areas and is dependent on rain-fed agriculture (World Bank,
2008; FAO, 2005). Botswana’s agriculture sector includes both livestock and crop farming systems, with farms
being divided into small-scale (smallholder) farms and large-scale commercial farms. Livestock production (and
especially beef) accounts for over 80 percent of the agriculture sector’s contribution to national GDP. About half of
the country’s population is still dependent on subsistence crop and livestock farming. Botswana currently covers
over 75 percent of its cereal food needs with imports (mainly maize and sorghum) (Botswana, 2015). Against this
background, the main aims of the project are to help reduce the country’s bill for agricultural imports and boost
food and nutrition security, particularly in rural communities.
It is crucial to improve the capacities of local institutions and tailor CSA implementation to local contexts. The
involvement of university staff and the training of extension officers and farmers addresses this need.
Description
The overall goal of the project is to develop resilient farming systems across the various agroecological zones
of Botswana. Although drought is a reoccurring phenomenon in the country and communities have developed
coping mechanisms over time, local institutions (extension service providers and universities) are still insufficiently
conversant with CSA and its technologies. The project aims to close this gap based on evidence-based field practices.
Specific objectives of the project include:

evaluate current farming systems in three (sub)districts (Gantsi, Boteti and Bobirwa) and identify climate-
smart practices within each district;

identify alternative off-farm livelihood options in the districts;

identify indigenous knowledge of agricultural practices (ethno-veterinary and ethno-botanical) to cope
with the effects of climate change, and identify and recommend climate-smart agricultural practices in
collaboration with farmers and extension workers; and

enhance subregional learning and sharing of experiences. Share the lessons learned from this project (in the
form of journal articles and policy briefs), so that regional institutions can also benefit.
Outcomes
The envisioned outcome of the project is the development or strengthening of national institutional and technical
capacities to adopt a CSA approach for the sustainable development of crop and livestock production systems.
The project identified a number of CSA options to improve crop and livestock production systems that are based on the
combination of indigenous practices and innovative technologies and practices. In addition, the project strengthened
capacities for innovative research and for the provision of extension services (e.g. training) to promote the inclusion of
both innovative and indigenous CSA practices into crop and livestock production systems. Academic staff who are experts
in crop and livestock production and extension but were new to CSA were involved in the project under the guidance
of FAO. As such, they improved their knowledge of CSA and passed this knowledge on to their students and peers.
Furthermore, case studies of the successful implementation of CSA practices and innovations, as well as of interventions
in prioritized value chains, were documented and shared with policymakers and stakeholders as part of the project.
To build institutional capacities, a series of technical workshops were conducted in different agroecological zones,
for different value chain actors and policymakers in the agriculture sector. The objective of these workshops was
to deepen participants’ understanding of CSA approaches and practices, and improve their ability to use CSA in
response to climate change. Extension personnel from governmental and non-governmental institutions were
trained in innovative extension and advisory approaches considered compatible with CSA practices. In addition,
workshops with technical experts were held to develop technical CSA materials, based on consultations with crop
and livestock farming communities and other value chain actors. The materials developed include guidelines on
CSA practices that integrate indigenous practices, as well as CSA manuals for extension service providers and
farmers. Field visits were made to test the guidelines and manuals with crop and livestock farmers in the different
agroecological zones. These field visits focused specifically on non-governmental actors, women and young farmers.