--- Breeding Better, More Resilient Squash Varieties in the Southeast ---

www.sare.org SARE 2023/2024 REPORT FROM THE FIELD 5 SOUTHERN SARE Along with growing trials, members of Common Wealth Seed Growers used taste testing to help identify the best squash varieties for production and marketing in the Southeast. Photos by Edmund Frost, Common Wealth Seed Growers Breeding Better, More Resilient Squash Varieties in the Southeast We’ve heard from growers in many parts of the Southeast how South Anna has been helpful to their operations. Since then I’ve been working on crosses between South Anna and other material to improve keeping quality and yields while maintaining the same level of flavor and disease resistance. We’re close to a new release.

Edmund Frost, co-owner of Common Wealth Seed Growers and Twin Oaks Seed Farm THE CHALLENGE Downy mildew frustrates farmers and home gardeners alike. But while it may be maddening for gardeners, a farmer can lose their entire season’s cucurbit crop to the disease and suffer significant financial harm. If more disease-resistant varieties can be developed, farmers in Virginia and across the Southeast may feel more confi- dent investing in cucurbit production. Plus, using selective breeding to create resistant crops reduces and potentially eliminates the need for chemical sprays and fungi- cides, which can save farmers money.

THE ACTIONS TAKEN Virginia farmer Edmund Frost, co-owner of Common Wealth Seed Growers and Twin Oaks Seed Farm, received funding from three Farmer/Rancher grants to develop better varieties of winter squash through careful research, selection and breeding.

The ideal squash would be disease and pest resistant, produce consistent shape and size fruit, and taste delicious. Importantly, the improved varieties needed to be well suited to the hot and humid conditions of the Southeast.

Frost’s first two projects involved rep- licated variety trials, and selection from a cross between Seminole Pumpkin and Waltham Butternut squash. The work resulted in South Anna (named after a river near Louisa, Va., where the research was conducted), a butternut squash that stands out for its downy mildew resistance, eat- ing quality and ability to produce well in the local climate. Frost then used the third grant to evaluate and develop new seed- stocks by crossing South Anna with other tropical and temperate varieties with a focus on keeping quality, higher yields and other traits. His ultimate goal is to develop one to three varieties that taste great, yield optimally, resist downy mildew and offer uniformity, different flavor profiles and shapes, and improved storage quality.

THE IMPACTS Frost’s projects have built upon each other, and now South Anna has become a popular squash variety for growers in the region.

Specific impacts include: • A new, better squash: South Anna, which has been available for sale since 2017 but is improved each year, has shown to have excellent downy mil- dew resistance, eating quality and productivity. • More options on the market:

Frost’s breeding work and research have increased the availability of resilient win- ter squash varieties for both organic and conventional farmers in the Southeast. • Additional research: Frost recently secured a fourth Farmer/Rancher grant to further improve South Anna and other butternut squash varieties for improved keeping quality, yields, Southeast adapta- tion and resistance to downy mildew, even if the pathogen changes in the future.

Learn more: See the related SARE projects FS20-325, FS16-291 and FS13-273.