--- Present, Implement and Monitor Your Business Plan ---

www.SARE.org 7 • Operations: regulations and policy, resource needs and gaps, size and capacity • Human resources: labor needs and gaps, com- pensation, management and communications • Finances: risk, organizational structure, financing options Task 5:

Present, Implement and Monitor Your Business Plan Recordkeeping is crucial to ensuring your plans are on the right track. Records can include field observations and numbers. Photo by Lance Cheung, USDA You will need to take your time and work closely with your planning team members to complete this task. It’s very possible you’ll need to expand your team for some of these steps, for example by consulting with bankers, Extension specialists, other farmers or people in the industry with whom you’re doing business.

IN THIS FINAL TASK, IT’S TIME TO PUT EVERYTHING into a written business plan. There’s no one-size-fits- all format or template for a business plan. A lot of it depends on your specific situation: what you’re trying to accomplish and who you need to share your business plan with. But, all plans should be well organized, thorough and easy to understand.

Planning task 5 in Building a Sustainable Business (pgs. 233–247) begins with sample outlines of business plans for five different situations: • For guiding the management team (a holistic plan) • For communicating with lenders or other investors • For adding a new product • For a cooperative or other collaborative marketing group • For a beginning farmer or startup business Finally, after all this planning work, it might seem intimidating to actually start implementing your plan!

Task 5 in Building a Sustainable Business gives an example of a farm family who wrote out an implemen- tation “to-do” list for the first year of their plan. It included three important details: the task, the person responsible and the deadline.

Two very important parts of managing a successful business are monitoring progress and keeping records.

Creating a list of monitoring checkpoints allows you to see if your plan is succeeding or if you’re heading into trouble. Think of these checkpoints as targets or objectives that are similar to your goals, only they’re more detailed and on shorter time frames. For example, a monitoring checkpoint might be achieving a specific production target, sales volume or profit margin, etc. at the end of year one.

Of course, the only way you can monitor your progress is by keeping good records. Keep records of any aspect of your business that relates to your moni- toring checkpoints and goals. These can be actual numbers, such as expenses, productivity measures and sales figures, or they can be more like observa- tions, such as the plant species or wildlife populations around the farm, or even reflections on conversations with customers.

Remember, business planning isn’t something you do once and then say you’re finished. Revisiting your business plan every 12 months or so is a great way to help you adapt to change or to correct what isn’t working, all while keeping your long-term goals in sight.

Remember, business planning isn’t something you do once and then say you’re finished.