--- Farm History and Current Situation ---

4 www.SARE.org Assessing the details of your current business is an important step in identifying new opportunities. Photo by Christophe Paul, USDA The business planning process begins with identifying your strongest values. Photo by Preston Keres, USDA Task 2:

Farm History and Current Situation BUSINESS PLANNING INVOLVES EXPLORING NEW directions for your business. But before you begin thinking about the future, it’s important to have a complete view of your current situation and how you arrived there.

Planning task 2 in Building a Sustainable Business (pgs. 27–86) walks you through the information you should collect at this point. This task takes time and effort. Worksheets are provided in that publication to help you stay organized.

The first major step in this task is to write a brief history of your farm and a description of its current state. Areas to address include: • How you entered the business and the key stages of growth that have led you to where you are now • Your biggest successes and failures along the way • Major events outside your personal story that have affected your farm—for example, changes in Task 1:

Identify Values START THE BUSINESS PLANNING PROCESS BY identifying your values. These are your most important ideas, beliefs or standards that guide you when you need to make decisions. Naming your values now will help you later in the business planning process when it’s time to create your mission and vision, goals, and business strategies.

Try thinking about how your values apply to different areas of your life and farm business: for example, your personal, economic, environmental and community values. Ask yourself questions like: • What’s most important to you in each of these areas? • How do you define success in each?

If family members, business partners or other people are part of your planning process, you should involve them now. Give them a chance to identify their values. Take time to see which values you share and which values might be different. This will make it easier to resolve any conflicts in the later steps of the process.

Planning task 1 in Building a Sustainable Business (pgs. 19–25) includes more information on this step, along with worksheets to help you capture both your personal values and shared values among your planning team.