--- Journal of the Royal Society Interface ---

Sustainable agriculture and food systems Comparing contrasting and contested versions 26  Chatham House Empirical evidence indicates that for many dimensions of sustainability (biodiversity, soil condition, carbon storage and pollution) agroecological approaches, including organic and regenerative farming, have a typically smaller environmental impact at the level of individual farms, in comparison to conventional approaches.

Agroecological approaches typically require more complex farming operations (including, for example, land rotation), produce a greater diversity of outputs, and give rise to landscapes that are heterogeneous. This heterogeneity itself supports biodiversity and other ecosystem services. Relaxing the assumption about demand growth reduces the inherent criticism that agroecological approaches are too land-inefficient to ‘meet demand’ or ‘feed the world’.

If people are incentivized to adopt a more diverse, plant-based diet for health purposes, demand for a wide range of vegetables and fruits would rise, and demand for livestock products would fall. If absolute demand falls sufficiently, for example, then even though the relative footprint per kg of product is high, the absolute methane emissions could be low enough to make mixed farming landscapes – where farms are engaged in a mixture of arable and livestock production, and have complex rotations producing a diversity of outputs – systemically feasible.86 This is because ruminants, while having a relatively large food footprint, may have an overall positive contribution to wider aspects of sustainability if farmed extensively, through (a) consuming grass, (b) nutrient cycling within mixed farming landscapes, and (c) promoting landscape heterogeneity and biodiversity.

With enough demand reduction, land pressure reduces as a whole – as do the incentives to expand the amount of land under agriculture. Under this version, it is therefore imagined possible both to share agricultural land with nature by farming more agroecologically, and to spare natural habitats from destruction – particularly because a significant amount of tropical deforestation is associated with cattle ranching, livestock feed production or oil production – all of which are expected to decline with the adoption of healthier diets.87 Within Version 2, technological innovation is perhaps less likely to be aimed at increasing the productivity of crops or livestock, and more likely to centre around delivering improvements in farming systems: shifting to complex, smaller-scale, more circular farming systems. Innovation is also required in the areas of governance and markets, changing regulations to ensure that environmental costs are internalized to the system, modifying market incentives to ensure transparency in health and environmental impacts, and changing consumption behaviours and food environments to stimulate the market ‘pull’ for healthier and more sustainable diets and reduced waste across the agricultural system. 86 Schader, C. et al. (2015), ‘Impacts of feeding less food-competing feedstuffs to livestock on global food system sustainability’, Journal of the Royal Society Interface, 12(113), https://doi.org/10.1098/rsif.2015.0891. 87 Willett et al. (2019), ‘Food in the Anthropocene’.