--- Challinor, A. and Benton, T. G. (2022), ‘Technical Report Chapter 7: International Dimensions’, in UK ---

Sustainable agriculture and food systems Comparing contrasting and contested versions 39  Chatham House profit-enhancing efficiency gains and increasingly intensive production framed as ‘more for less’. Agroecological approaches will, of course, continue, but will be the preserve of the richest consumers and the poorest farmers, who have less access to capital. In high-income countries, such approaches will thus remain niche.

Beyond market ideology, other factors that may affect version realization inevitably come into play. For example, global geopolitics and climate change impacts, including emergent pests and diseases, might drive increasing volatility, in weather and in the ability to trade, including sourcing fertilizers and other inputs, and accessing markets abroad.151 These trends may create a focus on the need to enhance resilience within food and trading systems.152 Further, they could provide incentives for a greater regionalization of supply chains and a greater uptake of agroecological farming, with its enhanced potential for resilience.

To enable more sustainable agriculture and food systems does require changes in governance. These might come from changing citizen attitudes and consumption behaviour, which can politicize the need for change and create the political space for decision-makers to engage. They might also originate in disruptive events that undermine the resilience of the system to such an extent that large-scale change quickly becomes possible.

However they might arise, many changes are urgently needed for food systems to become more healthy and sustainable, to tackle the global health crisis, reduce climate change and combat pollution and biodiversity loss. Such changes are plausible, given the right circumstances and events; whether they are likely is an ongoing debate. 151 Benton, T. G. (2019), ‘Using scenario analyses to address the future of food’, EFSA Journal, 17(S1), p. e170703, https://doi.org/10.2903/j.efsa.2019.e170703. 152 Challinor, A. and Benton, T. G. (2022), ‘Technical Report Chapter 7: International Dimensions’, in UK Government (2022), Technical Report of the Third UK Climate Change Risk Assessment (CCRA3), UK Climate Risk, https://www.ukclimaterisk.org/wp-content/uploads/2021/06/CCRA3-Chapter-7-FINAL.pdf.