--- Page 7 ---

Sustainable agriculture and food systems
Comparing contrasting and contested versions
5  Chatham House
While there is no agreed definition of sustainable agriculture, there is a vast
body of literature on the many environmental impacts which result from farming
practices. It is evident from the literature that agreeing on what makes agriculture
sustainable is difficult, for the following reasons:

— Agriculture can have multiple impacts on the environment (through pollution,
affecting soil, air or water quality; emissions of greenhouse gases; soil
degradation; or the reduction or degradation of habitats, resulting in biodiversity
loss). Reducing one metric (e.g. greenhouse gas emissions) may bring about
a trade-off in terms of other metrics (e.g. biodiversity loss).

— Context dependence must be taken into account. The same practice,
undertaken in different places, can have different outcomes on the same
aspect of sustainability, due to local variations in environment or climate.

— Many environmental impacts vary with the scale of the intervention (or its
frequency). For example, the intensive management of a single field in a large
area of agroecological farmland may not affect local biodiversity to a measurable
extent; but if the same agricultural practice was scaled up to landscape
level, it would. Hence, it is difficult to characterize a practice as sustainable –
or unsustainable – without reference to the scale of its implementation.

— In a market-driven system, the demand for agricultural outputs gives rise
to linkages between production areas, even if they are in different countries.
This means that if yield is sacrificed to reduce environmental impacts in one
place, then in order to meet demand the market will incentivize production
in other places, potentially with lower standards for environmental governance.
Increases in production could be achieved through agricultural intensification,
or by clearing land in order to convert it to farmland: and, in aggregate, this
process reduces the sustainability of the overall food system.
Therefore, there may not be a simple approach to defining sustainability in
agriculture without simultaneously also defining sustainability in food systems
as a whole7 – and, more broadly, examining how land and other key resources
are used by different sectors globally.
The following thought experiment serves as a useful illustration of the complexities
involved. Let us imagine that research highlights a new farming system which
reduces greenhouse gases, conserves biodiversity, stores carbon, maximizes
animal welfare and preserves the cultural, recreational and amenity value of the
landscape. While yields are only 70 per cent of those achieved through standard
intensive farming practices, the public goods are improved to such an extent
7 Where the food system comprises the actions taken to produce, transport, manufacture, sell and consume food.
Outcomes from the food system include food security, human health through diet and the environmental impacts
arising from the food system.