--- Supporting Farm Businesses with Financial Planning and Education ---

SOUTHERN SARE 6 SARE 2023/2024 REPORT FROM THE FIELD www.sare.org The technical details of finance, legality, business structures and goal strategies were just what I needed to start up this business with a structure and format that is set up for success.

A workshop participant THE CHALLENGE Farmers know better than anyone that theirs is not an easy life. In fact, according to the USDA Economic Research Service, 85 percent of new farm businesses fail within their first five years of production.

Supporting Farm Businesses with Financial Planning and Education Yet while there are plenty of training opportunities available related to sustain- able agriculture practices, there are fewer options when it comes to financial plan- ning, creating a business plan and keeping records. If education on these important aspects of running a business was easier to access and more readily available, new and seasoned farmers alike would be better able to manage their businesses for long- term success and profitability.

THE ACTIONS TAKEN Margo Hale of the National Center for Appropriate Technology (NCAT) used an Education grant to develop “Take Your Developing business management skills is vital to surviving through the early years of running a farm business. Photo by Lance Cheung, USDA Farm to the Next Level,” a six-part curricu- lum that covered how to develop business and financial plans, streamline recordkeep- ing systems, and improve labor manage- ment and marketing. The training series was then provided to an in-person group of farmers over the course of six months.

Throughout the course, NCAT experts and other agricultural professionals addressed access to capital, legal issues, business structures, branding and marketing, enter- ing new markets and other specifics of whole-farm business planning. Farmers were given space to share their own experi- ences and to talk with other participants, and they were provided resource books and publications that complemented the presentations. Once the in-person series ended, the project team converted the workshop to an online format.

THE IMPACTS Feedback from the course was very positive; participants felt more confident running their businesses, and they rated the training as a 4.7 out of 5. Specific impacts include: • One-on-one help: NCAT staff provided technical assistance to the trainees throughout the in-person course and after its completion. • Future use: NCAT plans to use the online course as a resource for additional beginning farmer training events, and new grant proposals have been developed to improve and expand on the subject matter. • Learning opportunities for all: “Take Your Farm to the Next Level” is available for anyone to take online through the ATTRA website.

Learn more: See the related SARE project EDS18-03.