--- Improving Tribal Food Sovereignty Through Mushroom Cultivation and ---

14 SARE 2023/2024 REPORT FROM THE FIELD www.sare.org WESTERN SARE Improving Tribal Food Sovereignty Through Mushroom Cultivation and Research Top: Jade Swor (far left) of the Potter Valley Tribe teaches tribal members and employees how to inoculate a log with mushrooms. Among the varieties they grow are grey oysters (left) and lion’s mane (right). Photos courtesy of Jade Swor, Potter Valley Tribe Mushrooms can grow on what we throw out. Perhaps it’s time to change how we think about food and waste.

Jade Swor, Potter Valley Tribe THE CHALLENGE Food sovereignty is crucial to sustain- ing the cultures, economies, community health and identities of Native American peoples across the nation. It allows tribes to self-determine what food to produce and how to produce it, with a focus on culturally appropriate foods grown to meet community needs. Food programs have sprouted up on tribal lands to educate and empower tribe members to take control of their diets and food supplies. While many of these programs focus on traditional foods and native plants, mushroom pro- duction is uncommon. The Potter Valley Tribe, descendants of the Northern Pomo people, cultivates a small variety of mush- room species on their land in Fort Bragg, Calif. They’ve implemented a closed-loop production system that allows them to increase the kinds of mushrooms they grow using waste substrates produced by local businesses, like spent coffee grounds, hardwood sawdust, spent brewer’s grain and cannabis stalks. After constructing a cultivation lab, they stopped outsourcing mushroom spawn by producing their own on site. The tribe’s ultimate goal is to sell mushrooms and subsequent products at farmers markets and co-ops.

THE ACTIONS TAKEN Supported by a Research to Grassroots grant, the project team established a com- munity mushroom cultivation lab and expanded current production by grow- ing different mushrooms known for their medicinal and culinary uses. They care- fully documented the cultivation process from collection, to inoculation, to harvest.

Mushrooms and mushroom medicine products were then given to tribal mem- bers. Educational materials were created to teach tribal youth and other regional tribes how to generate income by growing their own mushrooms using sustainable prac- tices and recycled waste materials.

THE IMPACTS The benefits of this project reached far beyond the Potter Valley Tribe thanks to a focus on regional networking, partnerships and outreach. Specific impacts include: • Inter-tribal knowledge sharing: The team collaborated with eight regional tribes for mushroom workshops, cooking demonstrations and mushroom gathering with youth. Three tribes will begin their own mushroom programs. • Strong participation: More than 40 new participants got involved with the project, including elders and youth. • Firm commitment: Building the mushroom cultivation lab, producing how-to guides and manuals, finding best practices, leading foraging expeditions and mapping the tribal land’s mycoflora ensure that mushrooms will remain an important part of the tribe’s food culture for years to come.

Learn more: See the related SARE project RGR20-010.