--- Covid-19 pandemic. In response, the Canadian Government ---

A Circular Agriculture and Agri-food Economy for Canada | 15 Health Agriculture provides Canadians with healthy food to eat.

However, some of the effects of agriculture can result in negative impacts on human health. Health complications can arise from exposure to environmental factors such as pesticides, air pollution, and contaminated water. Those most at risk of experiencing these health complications have close contact with a high concentration of containments (including farms), live in areas of high manufacturing, and experience contamination of drinking or recreational water sources. While many communities have access to carefully treated potable water, there are still communities, including Indigenous and rural communities, that do not have access to safe drinking water because of agricultural run-off.82 Using regenerative agriculture, holistic pest management approaches such as strategic crop rotation can reduce the application of pesticides. Precision agriculture can reduce the quantity of amendments required when these are needed, and the likelihood of exposures. Reduced application of agri- chemicals reduces the risk exposure of the general public as well as those working closely with these substances.

Resources that would become food waste also have the opportunity to improve human health. Innovations in using food wastes and by-products are creating health-promoting products such as supplements and probiotics, and medicine.

For example, GSK pharmaceuticals can use bread and potato wastes to create medical-grade glucose, a key ingredient for many of their products.83 Food Availability In 2018, 1.2 million households in Canada experienced food insecurity,84 a number that has increased since the onset of the Covid-19 pandemic. In response, the Canadian Government has allocated increased funding to support food initiatives, including $8.9 million to Second Harvest, Canada’s largest food rescue charity.

Although increased circularity and food rescue in a food system does not guarantee increased food security for its members, it can increase food availability for redistribution to those in need. If all rescued edible food were to end up on plates, it would feed 260 million people in North America.85 A circular food economy can potentially increase food affordability for low-income communities by lowering the cost of food through lower production costs and increased resource utilization, while also increasing opportunities to purchase discounted food.86 Job Creation The International Institute for Sustainable Development (IISD) suggests that economic activity pursued according to the principles of circular economy can create job opportunities and reduce regional inequalities beyond the possibilities available in the traditional linear economy.87 Jobs will be created by the new circular and social enterprise businesses developed to take advantage of zero-waste or value-added opportunities (e.g., creating new products from waste streams, such as fresh juices and beer varieties made from food scraps) and product-as-a- service business models. Research by Canada’s National Zero Waste Council has found that the implementation of circular practices can create a significant number of jobs specifically related to primary agricultural production in Canada. Just under 30,000 jobs (9,370 direct and 20,964 indirect) could be created by addressing left-in-field crops, alone.88 A more circular agriculture and agri-food system can reduce GHG emissions through various pathways.