--- and Sustainable Public Procurement ---

32 | Smart Prosperity Institute
place in many Canadian provinces). Another option could be to
introduce labelling for food packaging materials to enable better
post-consumption management.
A popular downstream regulation cited in the literature is the
introduction of organic landfill bans. In addition to supporting
waste management, this regulation could also support climate
mitigation objectives by eliminating methane emissions that
would otherwise have been created from landfilled food waste.
Also, this diverted food waste could be used as feedstock for
bioenergy facilities thereby reducing the need for fossil fuel-
derived energy. Additionally, food waste could be diverted to
composting facilities to produce soil amendment that can return
fertility to degraded soils and reduce the need for chemical
fertilizers. Ideally, a ban on organics should be a coordinated
policy initiative across jurisdictions and take into consideration
rural-urban contextual differences.163

Pricing
Pricing instruments, such as taxes and user fees, stimulate
market demand for circular innovation by establishing a price
for environmental damage. Because they allow the firms and
households impacted the flexibility to take actions that best suit
their situation, pricing instruments are considered to be more
cost-effective than regulation.164 They are especially attractive
tools because they simultaneously improve environmental
performance and generate government revenue that can be re-
invested to help compensate producers, firm and households
for the increased costs, or build the knowledge, skills and
infrastructure required to address a given type of environmental
damage.165
Such instruments could be applied at various stages of the supply
chain. At the farm level, regenerative agricultural practices can
be promoted by taxing harmful products like synthetic pesticides
and fertilizers that contribute to greenhouse gas emissions,
harm wildlife, and pollute the air and water. Alternatively, taxes
could directly target environmental externalities from food
production, processing and transportation. For instance, taxing
soil phosphorus content that exceeds a certain threshold rather
than taxing phosphorous fertilizers.166
Another example is a tax incentive for manufacturers, retailers and
others in the food industry to donate nutritious food to registered
charities supporting local communities. Such a tax credit or
deduction could offset the costs of operational changes required
to separate nutritious food from food that should be discarded,
as well as the costs associated with transporting this food to
registered charities.167 This could be supplemented by support to
build capacity and/or infrastructure in these charities to efficiently
handle food donations.
More downstream, municipal landfill tipping fees can be used to
send the right market signals, especially when working in tandem
with individual producer responsibility. This could involve
introducing new tipping fees (in municipalities where these
currently do not exist), or increasing fees to account for the full
environmental cost of waste disposal (e.g. methane emissions,
risk of leaching Into the environment, etc.). While setting tipping
fees, efforts should be made to harmonize these fees between
neighbouring jurisdictions to deter the practice of waste exports
to jurisdictions where the fees are lower. Tipping fees could also
be differentiated for different materials like organics to specifically
incentivize their diversion from landfill. In addition to municipal
tipping fees, provincial governments could also implement
tipping-fee surcharges that can help generate revenue to fund
other waste management projects throughout the province.168
Box 17
UK’s landfill tax on
biodegradable waste 169
In 1996, the U.K. introduced a national landfill tax
on biodegradable waste (e.g. organics) and inactive
wastes (e.g. concrete). The tax applies to all landfills-
public and private- and is levied on top of local
tipping fees. Over time it has increased from $17 per
tonne in 1999 to $150 in 2017. It has been shown
to lower quantities of landfill waste and increase
diversion rates significantly.
Procurement
Government procurement is considered a powerful public
policy tool to encourage circular economy practices. Circular
procurement, and the closely related practices of Green Public
Procurement* and Sustainable Public Procurement**, emphasize
the need for purchasing decisions to contribute to closed energy
and material loops within supply chains. This practice has a dual
benefit—it allows governments to lead by example, and offers a
test-bed for new innovations, which helps with their commercial
growth and with attracting private investment.170
Large government institutions that provide meals, like schools,
hospitals and prisons, are major purchasers of food. By
introducing circular principles in their purchasing policies and
practices, they can not only achieve significant food waste
* Green Public Procurement (GPP) is a process by which public authorities seek to purchase goods, services and works with a reduced environmental impact throughout
their life-cycle compared to goods, services and works with the same primary function which would otherwise be procured.
** Sustainable Public Procurement (SPP) is a process by which public authorities seek to achieve the appropriate balance between the three pillars of sustainable devel
opment - economic, social and environmental - when procuring goods, services or works at all stages of the project.