--- Functional Linkages in Canada’s ---

A Circular Agriculture and Agri-food Economy for Canada | 19 Box 3 Agricultural Drones To facilitate the activities of precision agriculture, drones are increasingly being used. Some of the abilities of agricultural drones include crop spraying, spot spraying, crop mapping and surveying, irrigation monitoring and management, livestock monitoring and seed planting.

With global supply chains become increasingly complex and opaque, strategically shortening supply chains for specific commodities may help build resilience and efficiency. Diversifying local food production to meet the needs of cities and communities within the peri-urban area can reduce the need to import products, increase opportunities for local industrial symbiosis, limit the use of fossil fuels for distribution, and minimize the amount of packaging required for some food products.98 Additionally, establishing functional linkages between the agri-food sector and other economic sectors can support circularity through network development and coordination of stakeholders (Box 4). Continued stimulation and support for sector linkages and networks can encourage further circularity and improve the functionality of programs and frameworks that are already in place.

Functional Linkages in Canada’s Agriculture and Agri-food Sector Canada’s agriculture and agri-food sector have a number of emerging networks, which work to encourage functional linkages with the sector.

Including the Canadian Food Innovators Network (CFIN) which expands strategic connection and collaborations in Canada’s food innovation industry. The Canadian Agri-Food Automation and Intelligence Network (CAAIN) which strives to make connections between technology corporations and agri-food companies to drive growth, and the Canadian Agricultural Partnership program. which provides investment for further growth and development of Canada’s agriculture and agri-food sector.

Box 4 Food Loss and Waste Reduction As highlighted in Section 2.2, food loss and waste is a major challenge in the agriculture and agri-food sector. One practice to reduce food loss and waste generated from primary production through retail is improved demand forecasting.

Accurate food demand forecasting using artificial intelligence technologies have been shown to prevent food loss and waste by eliminating excess crop production or product distribution, or by providing the opportunity to find alternative markets for excess food.99 This can also help farms to plan for hiring seasonal labour. Unharvested food is, unfortunately, a common occurrence in the agricultural sector. Even with access to affordable labour, some crops go unharvested because they are unwanted due to excess yield, deterioration of purchasing contract, or abnormal crops that have a low food grading.100 In these cases, building gleaning networks can reduce food waste by helping donate farm produce that would otherwise be left to rot or be turned under in-field. Marketing “ugly” produce can also help to ensure that oddly-shaped or -coloured produce that doesn’t meet food-grade contract requirements is still harvested and put to use in the food system (Box 4). 101 This has the potential to Improve consumer welfare (by allowing them greater choice) and potentially enables farmers to capture greater revenue by selling some of their food-grade produce into higher value domestic or export markets.

Box 5 Loblaws - Naturally Imperfect 102 In 2015, Loblaws launched a campaign titled “Naturally Imperfect” bringing physically abnormal produce to its customers at a lower cost. The line started with only fresh produce but has experienced such success that it expanded in 2017 to include frozen products.

At the processing and manufacturing stage, one way to reduce food loss and waste is source prevention by ensuring that machinery and technology are operating in optimal ways to prevent the loss or diversion of food resource.103 Integrating advanced technology in food processing can include using water pigging systems instead of flushing to increase resource capture and reduce water use, contaminant detection technology to reduce false food product rejections or recalls, and using artificial technology for food quality inspections which can significantly reduce the amount of acceptable food inputs rejected based on human sorting.104 These technologies can all work to keep resources in the cycle and at their highest value while increasing profits for companies and decreasing associated costs such as waste disposal and wastewater treatment fees.