--- 6.1. PUSH Policies ---

30 | Smart Prosperity Institute Figure 11: Elements of a full suite of public policies to support circular innovation (Adapted from an original diagram in SPI’s Discussion Paper: Canada’s Next Edge) PUSH policies focus on the early stages of innovation and generate ideas that carry through to later stages. They generally do one of two things. One, incentivize private research initiatives, either through direct incentives (e.g. tax credits) or by helping firms capture the economic returns from that research (e.g. through intellectual property rights). Or two, supplement private research with public research through funding for government labs and universities.

PULL policies are particularly important in the commercialization phase of innovation. They generate market demand for innovations that might otherwise not appear profitable given that there is little market reward for solving problems (like pollution) that firms and households do not pay for in the first place (i.e., environmental externalities).

GROW policies are the bridge between PUSH and PULL.

They help take promising innovations from the research and development (R&D) stage to the point where they are ready for market entry. They help entrepreneurs and firms secure financial and non-financial support required to turn their ideas into demonstration products and services and then scale up their solutions to meet market demand.

Finally, STRENGTHEN policies support the system as a whole.

Government interventions to bolster this system include defining a clear vision and translating it into strategies, strengthening public institutions, building partnerships, investing in new skills, identifying and measuring key performance indicators and metrics, enriching the policy mix and ensuring accountability and continuity. 6.1. PUSH Policies Innovation begins with research. Research by academics, entrepreneurs, business, and government, all contribute to the generation of intellectual property, which after multiple levels of refinement can become a commercial success. PUSH policies aim to drive new ideas and support the earliest stages of innovation.

These public policies include those that stimulate government- funded, academic, and business research, as well as those that stimulate research collaboration. They are particularly important to kickstart the innovation chain because evidence suggests that innovation geared towards better environmental outcomes (like waste reduction) is more at risk of the knowledge spillover market failure than other forms of innovation. The knowledge spillover market failure is the phenomenon whereby when researchers discover something new, their findings may, at least in part, ‘spill over’ to benefit other researchers, firms, or sectors, making them unable to capture the full value of their discoveries.152 There exist several tools through which such research can be stimulated by different actors. Government research can be stimulated by making it a sustained priority in public research labs. University-based research can be stimulated by targeting funding through granting councils. Private R&D could be encouraged by research tax credits. In addition, innovative tools such as prizes, competitions and challenges could also be explored.153 Finally, given the systemic nature of the circular economy, it is also crucial to encourage joint research efforts by researchers, technology centres, industry, entrepreneurs, users, governments, and civil society.154