--- What is a Business Plan? ---

2 www.SARE.org An Introduction to Business Planning BEFORE WE GET INTO THE DETAILS OF HOW TO create a business plan, let’s first address some important questions about the process, including: • What is a business plan? • Why create a business plan? • Who should you involve in business planning? • When should you start the business planning process?

What is a Business Plan?

In general, you can think of a business plan as a “roadmap to success.” It combines all of the following: • The big-picture ideas of why you’re farming • What you hope to achieve with your business • How you’ll get there using resources that you have on hand • New strategies for operations, marketing, human resources and finance Some of the most important pieces of a business plan include: • A formal mission statement and goals for the farm • An inventory or assessment of your farm’s current situation • Clear strategies for short- and long-term activities that will help you meet your goals • A collection of documents about your business, such as budgets, cash flow statements and inventory lists, to help you make sure the plans you create are realistic and likely to succeed A written business plan is a critical document to share with lenders, potential investors and others when you’re seeking the resources you need to make changes to your farm business.

Why Create a Business Plan?

Farms often have more than one enterprise, or revenue stream. For example, a single farm may produce many commodity crops (e.g., corn, soybeans, rye), annual specialty crops (e.g., tomatoes, carrots, peppers), fruit and nut tree crops, pastures or forage crops, and livestock (e.g., dairy, eggs, meat). In addition to crops, farms may also manage multiple related enterprises as part of their business (e.g., farm stands, autumn hayrides, or Christmas wreath sales). Each of these enterprises on a single farm can have its own revenue cycle, maintenance needs, production cycles and risks.

At the same time, farms can involve many people— business partners, family members and long-time employees—who probably have different skills, interests, needs and goals.

Business planning helps you piece this information together so that you can: • Identify and pursue your short- and long-term goals in a realistic and strategic way • See if a particular enterprise—or the business as a whole—is a good use of your labor, equipment, natural resources and capital • Explore new opportunities, identify possible risks to your business and respond to unexpected setbacks • Monitor your progress toward your goals and make changes if needed • Communicate better with potential business partners, lenders or customers Nobody can plan for everything, but you can plan for the expected and try to anticipate the unexpected.

Who Is Involved in Business Planning?

Most farmers and ranchers don’t go at it alone. Maybe your spouse or partner, parents, siblings or children are part of the operation in some way. Or, maybe you work with non-family business partners, regular employees, shareholders or investors. The business planning process needs to include everybody who has an active interest in the farm’s day-to-day opera- tions and its long-term success.

You’ll also want to involve special advisors during the process, depending on your needs. These advisors may include accountants, bankers, lawyers and farmer OUR IN-DEPTH BUSINESS PLANNING GUIDE This bulletin introduces you to the business planning process. When you’re ready to create a business plan for yourself, use the workbook Building a Sustainable Business for guidance.

Available free online at www.sare.org/business To order a print copy ($21 plus shipping), visit www.sare.org/business or call (301) 779–1007 In general, you can think of a business plan as a “roadmap to success.”