--- The Basics of Farm Business Planning ---

Opportunities in Agriculture The Basics of Farm Business Planning Your business plan is a roadmap to the success of your farm or ranch. Photo by Preston Keres, USDA Also available at www.sare.org/business- planning-basics, or order a free hard copy at (301) 779–1007. 4/25 SUSTAINABLE FARMING AND RANCHING MEANS taking care of the land, the environment, people and the community, while the farm business makes a profit. Many farmers and ranchers choose sustain- able farming and ranching as a lifestyle that reflects their values. Common goals include: • Having a good quality of life for themselves, their families and their employees • Producing fresh, healthy foods for their communities • Taking care of the land for the next generation • Helping their communities understand and accept their way of farming Farm business planning is critical because it helps you to identify and achieve long-term goals for yourself, your family, your business and your land.

Creating a solid business plan for your operation can be an involved process. This publication will introduce you to its basics, including what a business plan is, why you need one, and what to expect from the planning process when you’re ready to get started.

This publication summarizes the five tasks (or steps) to help you create a written business plan.

These tasks are based on SARE’s Building a Sustainable Business (www.sare.org/business), an in-depth workbook that guides readers through the many details of the planning process.

Along with information about each task, Building a Sustainable Business provides dozens of work- sheets you can use to create a unique plan for your own situation. When you’re ready to start planning, consider using the guidance and worksheets in Building a Sustainable Business.

See the “Resources” section of this guide for more publications on a range of related topics, such as federal funding opportunities, planning the transition to organic, setting up a legal structure for your farm business, and adapting your farm to a changing climate.

CONTENTS An Introduction to Business Planning 2 Task 1: Identify Values 4 Task 2: Farm History and Current Situation 4 Task 3: Vision, Mission and Goals 5 Task 4: Strategic Planning and Evaluation 6 Task 5: Present, Implement and Monitor Your Business Plan 7 Resources 8