--- Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO). ---

BG-12.17 Sustainable Agriculture Resources Online Resources Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO). The Future of Food and Agriculture: Trends and Challenges. New York, NY: FAO, 2017. Available online at http://www.fao.org/3/a-i6583e.pdf. “How can we achieve FAO’s original vision of a world free from hunger and malnutrition?

The report sheds some light on the nature of the challenges that agriculture and food systems are facing now and throughout the 21st century, and provides some insights as to what is at stake and what needs to be done. What emerges is that ‘business as usual’ is no longer an option but calls for major transformations in agricultural systems, in rural economies and in how we manage our natural resources.” Manitoba Agriculture. Agricultural Climate of Manitoba. https://www.gov.mb.ca/agriculture/weather/agricultural-climate-of-mb.html (date accessed—2017-12-05) “This reference tool is for agricultural producers and agribusiness. Using a series of maps, it describes the agricultural climate of Manitoba, based on the climate in the region over a 60-year period (1929 to 1988).” Print Resources Manitoba Agriculture. Field Crop Production Guide. Winnipeg, MB: Province of Manitoba, 2017. “The Field Crop Production Guide published by Manitoba Agriculture offers current production information on Manitoba crops such as barley, oats, rye, triticale, wheat, canola, flax, sunflowers, faba beans, field beans, field peas, lentils, forage crops, buckwheat, canary seed, caraway, coriander, corn, mustard, soybeans and some of Manitoba’s newest crops such as amaranth, azuki bean, borage, chickpea, dill seed, fenugreek, lathyrus, lupin, mung bean, proso millet, quinoa, safflower and spelt.” Manitoba Agriculture. Soil Management Guide. Winnipeg, MB: Province of Manitoba, 2017. “This guide focuses on three key principles: ■ ■Keeping the soil in place by reducing tillage practices ■ ■Maintaining or improving soil quality parameters, such as organic matter, bulk density, earthworms, and desirable soil structure ■ ■Managing and protecting water supplies”