--- and lower prices. As declared by the US Department of Agriculture’s Economic ---

Sustainable agriculture and food systems Comparing contrasting and contested versions 14  Chatham House The assumption that demand is predictable and fixed, and can therefore be met by intensifying production to allow land to be spared from agricultural expansion, is therefore a weak assumption (see also critique to Version 1, Assumption 5, below).

Demand is not a ‘given’ – it is an endogenous variable that can be changed, whether positively or negatively.

Assumption 2: Growing market demand requires productivity growth Framing: It is central to current economic thinking that markets are the best mechanism for increasing prosperity and that suppliers should be enabled to meet demand in ways that are most efficient and productive, without interventions or regulation (often referred to as ‘red tape’25) that may constrain supply, and thus price. The free-market view is that if demand exists (or can be created), profit can be made from supplying that demand. Changing the structure of the market to constrain demand or supply reduces potential economic growth, and is therefore to be avoided.

Further, it is often implicitly assumed that farmers would not farm in ways that are not economically sustainable, and therefore environmental regulation is an unnecessary form of red tape which increases the costs of production. Similarly, many free marketeers, as well as many politicians, would suggest that if people want to consume goods that are bad for their dietary health or that increase greenhouse gas emissions or biodiversity losses, they should be entitled to,26 and the market should not be specifically structured around regulation for reasons related to public goods. Regulation is seen to impinge directly on the economic public goods that arise from reducing prices, increasing choices and allowing different forms of consumption that contribute to economic growth.

Thus, competitive markets drive innovation, leading to increasing efficiency and lower prices. As declared by the US Department of Agriculture’s Economic Research Service:

Productivity growth in agriculture has allowed food to become more abundant and cheaper even as the world’s population has increased.27 This view is very deeply entrenched. Agriculture is often framed as an economic sector, and farmers as market actors, with the role of contributing to meeting demand (often erroneously characterized as ‘feeding the world’) by growing more food. This framing leads to a discourse that it is the ‘moral duty’ of farmers to contribute to maximizing on-farm productivity growth, and that adoption of new 25 For example: UK Department for Environment, Food & Rural Affairs and The Rt Hon Owen Paterson MP (2013), ‘Agriculture red tape to be removed’, press release, 17 July 2013, https://www.gov.uk/government/ news/agriculture-red-tape-to-be-removed. 26 Eley, J., Parker, G., Hancock, A. and Evans, J. (2021), ‘Boris Johnson rejects proposal to tax sugar and salt in food’, Financial Times, 15 July 2021, https://www.ft.com/content/9687484f-2703-4e55-a37a-827a056ac962; Laville, S. (2021), ‘UK meat tax and frequent-flyer levy proposals briefly published then deleted’, Guardian, 20 October 2021, https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2021/oct/20/meat-tax-and-frequent-flyer-levy- advice-dropped-from-uk-net-zero-strategy. 27 U. S. Department of Agriculture, Economic Research Service (2022), ‘International Agricultural Productivity’, https://www.ers.usda.gov/data-products/international-agricultural-productivity.