--- Page 4 ---

2  Chatham House
Summary

— There is significant and growing recognition of the need to transform food
systems to reduce their environmental impact. This has increased attention
on the need for agriculture to become more ‘sustainable’.

— However, for many reasons, there is no widely agreed conceptualization
of how different approaches to agriculture contribute to the sustainability
of food systems.

— This paper sets out to compare and contrast two commonly articulated versions
of how agriculture and food systems are related, and how food systems may become
more sustainable. Version 1 focuses on sparing land for nature, and on increasing
the productivity of agricultural land while minimizing environmental impacts;
Version 2 focuses on scaling up nature-friendly farming while emphasizing
demand-side changes in order to reduce the overall pressure on land.

— For one version to be preferred over another, a range of assumptions are explicitly
or implicitly made: these assumptions are presented alongside the related critiques.
In each version, a key assumption concerns the role of the market and the degree
to which market failure could (or should) be addressed by structural change.
This assumption underpins whether large-scale changes in demand (particularly
towards healthier diets) are achievable or even desirable.

— If it is assumed that demand will necessarily grow (because the global population
and its wealth are projected to increase), it follows that growth in productivity
is needed, and sparing land for nature may contribute towards sustainability
goals. In contrast, if it is assumed that structural change can occur within markets,
and healthier diets can be adopted, demand growth is arguably not a certainty –
in which case nature-friendly farming (‘agroecological practices’) can be scaled,
because, in comparison with intensive systems, relatively lower yields at farm
level pose less of a constraint.

— The arguments in support of both Version 1 and Version 2 of sustainable
agriculture and food systems tend to be primarily based on assumptions that
may be pragmatic (‘that is the way the world is’), or that may relate to power
relationships and politics, particularly with respect to the primacy given to the
role of the market. Ultimately, such assumptions have an ideological basis rather
than a scientific one. Both versions of sustainable agriculture are informed
by a set of assumptions that can be challenged, and these assumptions should
be assessed transparently in order to achieve the goal of truly sustainable
farming and food systems.