--- 2021 Global Nutrition Report ---

Sustainable agriculture and food systems Comparing contrasting and contested versions 32  Chatham House Assumption 3: A healthy diet is also a (more) sustainable one Framing: Version 2 implicitly assumes that there is, or can be, alignment between ‘healthy’ and ‘sustainable’ food, and that furthermore, the trade-offs between climate-friendly and biodiversity-friendly production can be managed through the extensification of production, enabled through demand contraction arising from the adoption of healthier, lower-impact, diets. While there is a significant debate about what constitutes a healthy diet, and further debate about what constitutes a ‘healthy and sustainable diet’120 (a topic reviewed also in the IPCC’s 2019 special report on ‘Climate Change and Land’121), there is reasonable consensus that there can be alignment between healthy and sustainable diets. The IPCC report concludes:

In summary, there is significant potential mitigation (high confidence) arising from the adoption of diets in line with dietary recommendations made on the basis of health. These are broadly similar across most countries. These are typically capped by the number of calories and higher in plant based foods, such as vegetables, fruits, whole grains, legumes, nuts and seeds, and lower in animal- sourced foods, fats and sugar. Such diets have the potential to be both more sustainable and healthier than alternative diets (but healthy diets are not necessarily sustainable and vice versa).

The extent to which the mitigation potential of dietary choices can be realised requires both climate change and health being considered together. Socio-economic (prices, rebound effects), political, and cultural contexts would require significant consideration to enable this mitigation potential to be realised.122 The primary alignment of healthy and sustainable diets is through eating more whole foods and fewer processed foods: the 2021 Global Nutrition Report states that: ‘A healthy diet consists of plenty of fruits, vegetables, legumes, nuts/seeds, whole grains and oils high in unsaturated fats, and little to no red and processed meat, sugar-sweetened beverages, refined grains and oils high in saturated fats.’123 Critique: If structural changes in food systems enabled the whole world to eat a diet as defined in Assumption 3 above, the production of fruits and vegetables would need to increase markedly, concurrent with a reduction in grains, oils and sugar – as current food systems focus on yields and calorific, not nutritional, security.124 This would imply radical changes to the horticultural sector, which could result in either a ‘Version 1’ global intensification of horticulture and international trade, or a ‘Version 2’ transition towards more mixed farming systems, where local horticulture is embedded in farming landscapes and there is a move away from monocultures. Thus, while a healthy and sustainable diet, based more on fruits and vegetables and less on animal-derived foods, might support more heterogeneous farming systems with more regionalized supply chains, the robustness of this assumption is weak. 120 Springmann, M. et al. (2018), ‘Health and nutritional aspects of sustainable diet strategies and their association with environmental impacts: a global modelling analysis with country-level detail’, The Lancet Planetary Health, 2(10), pp. e451–e461, https://doi.org/10.1016/S2542-5196(18)30206-7; Garnett, T. (2014), ‘What is a sustainable healthy diet? A discussion paper’, Oxford: Food Climate Research Network, https://assets. publishing.service.gov.uk/media/57a089dfe5274a27b20002df/FCRN-sustainable-healthy-diet.pdf. 121 Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (2019), ‘Climate Change and Land’, Table 5.6. 122 Ibid., p. 499. 123 Springmann, Mozaffarian, Rosenzweig and Micha (2021), ‘Chapter 02: What we eat matters’. 124 Krishna Bahadur, K. C. et al. (2018), ‘When too much isn’t enough’.