--- Journal of Zoology ---

Sustainable agriculture and food systems Comparing contrasting and contested versions 11  Chatham House Under the assumption that demand will grow, to enable land use to be sustainable overall, biodiversity-rich natural land should be protected from agricultural expansion, and portions of unused land should be restored to native ecosystems.

The rationale for this is that native ecosystems are associated with the highest levels of biodiversity and natural capital. Land should therefore be ‘spared for nature’.14 If it is assumed that demand will inevitably grow, and that agricultural expansion is not possible because of sparing land for nature, then it follows that more food must be grown per unit of area. This is a definition of intensifying agriculture, but any such intensification should be done while reducing the environmental impact:15 in other words, intensification should be sustainable. Given the necessity of meeting demand, yield is often seen as the primary output, and gains in sustainability are primarily driven through gains in efficiency, limiting inputs to yield-maximizing levels to prevent leakage of fertilizers or pesticides.

Some assert the need to consider reducing yields in some places in order to gain sustainability where environmental costs are large,16 on the typical assumption that yield increases arising from sustainable intensification in other places will compensate to enable global production to continue increasing.

The predominant focus is on gaining efficiency through raising outputs while reducing inputs (land, labour, synthetic inputs), primarily through the use of technology: genetics that increase yields (and resilience to climate impacts and/or pests) and precision agriculture (in which the 4Rs principle applies: putting the right inputs in the right places, at the right times and in the right amounts).

Version 1 requires technological developments in genetics and precision management of crops or livestock, utilizing data (e.g. from satellites, drones or on-the-ground sensors) and data analytics connected to smarter machinery.

Beyond increased efficiency – which typically aligns with notions of increasing profitability for farmers, and therefore is often part of the normal ‘direction of travel’ for intensive farmers – proponents argue for (a) increasingly substituting processes in order to gain environmental goals (e.g. natural pest control through integrated pest management, rather than pesticides as a first resort), and (b) redesigning farming systems towards those that regenerate, rather than erode, natural capital.17 Given that demand is set to grow and might exceed the ability to supply, and given the key assumption that land sparing can be enabled by intensification, the associated notion of any change in demand is to treat products with a lower environmental footprint as being by definition more sustainable, as they are more environmentally efficient (in relation to their impact per unit of production: for example, kg of carbon dioxide equivalent – kgCO₂e – per kg of product). Thus, within the discourse on sustainable agriculture and food, life cycle assessment is the prime technique of analysis, leading to a substitution hierarchy (e.g. from beef to chicken to beans). Given the primacy accorded to meeting projected 14 Balmford, A. (2021), ‘Concentrating vs. spreading our footprint: how to meet humanity’s needs at least cost to nature’, Journal of Zoology, 315(2), https://doi.org/10.1111/jzo.12920. 15 Garnett, T. et al. (2013), ‘Sustainable Intensification in Agriculture: Premises and Policies’, Science, 341(6141), pp. 33–34, https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1234485. 16 Ibid.; Buckwell, A. et al. (2014), Sustainable Intensification of European Agriculture, Brussels: RISE Foundation, https://risefoundation.eu/wp-content/uploads/2020/07/2014_-SI_RISE_FULL_EN.pdf. 17 Pretty, J. et al. (2018), ‘Global assessment of agricultural system redesign for sustainable intensification’, Nature Sustainability, 1, pp. 441–46, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41893-018-0114-0.