--- The Provision Coalition ---

Agri-Food: Part Three of the Global Sector Best Practices Series | 7
Process optimization
Shorter supply chains
• Lufa Farms36 CDN is a Montreal-based urban farming
company that runs three commercial rooftop
hydroponic greenhouses. They deliver food from
these rooftops directly to company partners and
homes.
• Ultima37 is a Finnish restaurant that grows its
ingredients on its restaurant premises to eliminate
waste packing and transport impacts. The
restaurant is an eating space and a productive lab
for hydroponic and aeroponic cultivation systems.
Digital food waste tracking

• Winnow38 is an international software company
that enables large commercial kitchens to monitor
their food waste. It helps identify why and
where waste is happening so that appropriate
operational decisions can be made to minimize
it. IKEA installed Winnow in 35% of their kitchens
and saved an estimated 1 million meals within a
few months.39
Agrimetrics yield tracking
• Field Explorer40 is a data product by Agrimetrics,
a leading UK company in agriculture data. It
provides data on all 1.6 million fields in the
UK including field facts, field trends, and field
forecasts. This tool ensures the most sustainable
and efficient management and use of agricultural
fields.
Quality control
• The Provision Coalition41 CDN is an organization
in Guelph, Ontario that aids food and beverage
companies increase their revenues through the
implementation of sustainable practices. This is
done through increasing revenue streams, finding
methods to reduce costs and elevating brands
through greater transparency.
• The Calgary Italian Bakery42 CDN is one of the
largest independent bakeries in Western
Canada. They are working on improving their
bread line dough transfer and English muffin
quality consistency (approx. 50% of their English
muffin waste is characterized as deformed or
misshaped). If fully realized, they will save 50,000
kg of bread dough per year.
The Ideal
•
Continued growth in each of these practices.
•
Food systems move away from a produce, batch,
and queue standpoint to a lean production chain.
This approach would match capacity to customer
and consumer demand and reduce cycle time.
•
Improved forecasting of consumer demand.
•
Build gleaning networks to recover vegetables
and fruit that would otherwise be left to rot or
turned under in-field.
•
Ensure that inventories in the food supply chain
are appropriately sized and stored in ways that
rescue spoilage.
Responsible consumption
and procurement
Consumer awareness
• The ‘Re-Imagine Food’ Campaign43 CDN by the
City of Guelph aims to educate residents on
the real costs of food waste, boost demand for
circular economy productions, and build stronger
relationships between food producers and
consumers.
• Waste and Resources Action Programme’s (WRAP)
Love Food Hate Waste Campaign44 is a UK food
waste reduction campaign introduced in 2007
that helped cut 21% of household food waste in
its first five years. Since its launch, it has helped
save UK consumers 13 billion pounds by teaching
people how to reduce food waste.
• Metro Vancouver45 CDN partnered with WRAP UK
to launch the first Canadian branch of the Love
Food Hate Waste campaign. The campaign
aims to help people reduce food waste at home,
provide storage tips to elongate food life, help
with portion calculation to determine how much
of each ingredient to buy, and provides seasonal
menus. The campaign has numerous partners,
including Sobeys.
Discounting soon-expiring food
• Walmart46 CDN offers discounted repacked bruised
or peak freshness produce through their $1/$2
Bag Program. They also reduce prices through
their Customer Value Program to allow for the
quick sale of fresh meat, bakery, dairy, and
produce items approaching their best before
dates. Walmart is committed to achieving zero
food waste by 2025.