--- Agriprotein: Using insect ---

Agri-Food: Part Three of the Global Sector Best Practices Series | 5
optimization. Applications of process optimization include
shortening supply chains to match supply to consumer
demand thereby creating less unwanted food, and reducing
transportation needs. Finnish restaurant Ultima, for example,
grows its ingredients on its restaurant premises to eliminate
waste packing and transport impacts. The use of agrimetrics yield
trackers and food waste trackers are some other applications.
Responsible consumption and procurement, promoted
through consumer awareness of sustainable food choices,
can also help push forward circular economic practices. For
example, WRAP’s ‘Love Food Hate Waste Campaign’ in the UK,
launched in 2007, was able to cut food waste by 21% in its first
five years. This campaign was also launched in Canada, in 2018,
by the National Zero Waste Council.
Other practices in this sector look to OPTIMIZE resource
use through intensified use of products. One effective
strategy to achieve this is by creating sharing economies. For
example, food sharing projects, like the Community Fridge
in Ottawa, provide an app-based platform for households and
businesses to share surplus food with others to pick up, instead of
it being wasted.
Agriprotein: Using insect
agriculture to address food waste
Agriprotein is a South African company that uses insect
agriculture to address food waste. Agriprotein feeds Black
Soldier Fly larvae organic food waste. The Black Soldier
Fly is able to increase its weight 200 times in ten days.
Once the fly larvae reach their maximum size, they are
dried and milled to remove fat and turned into an organic
animal feed called MagMeal. Their fat is then converted
into an oil used as a health supplement for animals, or as a
biofuel. Remaining organic materials are transformed into
nutrient rich compost and sold to local farms. Agriprotein
can process 250 tonnes of organic food waste each day
with their larvae (90,000 tonnes per year). This produces
5,000 tonnes of Magmeal, 2,000 tonnes of MagOil and
20,000 tonnes of MagSoil.25
Due to the perishable nature of food products, there exist limited
ways of extending their lifespan. However, food can be
diverted from landfills by donating and reselling surplus
food. For example, Canadian grocery chain Metro applies
the practice of surplus food recovery by donating 6 million
meals to community organizations in 2018 through its food
recovery program. Recently, the practice of meal subscription
services has gained momentum and created opportunities for
the performance economy in the sector. HelloFresh is one
example of a subscription-based meal service that delivers fresh,
pre-portioned ingredients and recipes to customers every week.
Finally, the agri-food sector has long been a leader in practices
to give resources new life such as recycling and
composting programs. The City of Guelph, for example,
collects 10,000 tonnes of food products each year with its Green
bin composting program, diverting 32% of organics from landfill.
Re-appropriation of food waste and surplus is another
technique. This can be done in a number of ways such as being
made into fabric, as Orange Fiber is doing with orange peels,
or turning food not fit for human consumption into animal feed.
Energy recovery is yet another strategy used by the agri-food
sector to give resources new life. Maple Leaf Foods diverted
5,486 metric tonnes of packaged meat waste to biodigesters in
2017, producing 2.1 million kWh of green electricity that was fed
back into the Ontario electrical grid and that prevented 1,473
tonnes of CO2 emissions. McDonalds France collects used
cooking oil from its restaurants and transports it to a processing
plant to make biofuel.

Loblaw: Reducing retail food waste
In 2018, Canadian grocery retailer Loblaw committed to
reduce or divert their store-generated food waste by 50%
before 2025. Loblaw has developed a wide variety of
methods to achieve this goal including: 26
•
Investing in inventory systems to ensure that
the correct amount of food is ordered and
cut down on unpurchased goods
•
Expanding their network of food banks,
donating more than 8.5 million pounds of
food in 2018
•
Directing stale or expired grocery goods
to use in the making of grain-based animal
feed
•
Feeding trimming from produce and
inedible organics to anaerobic digesters to
generate electricity that can be used locally
or be fed back into electrical grids
•
Converting used cooking oil into biodiesel
•
Investing in low-carbon intensive micro-
livestock, like cricket flour
The agri-food industry is responsible
for almost one quarter of global
greenhouse gas emissions