--- Specific Examples: Objective 4, Giving ---

10 | Smart Prosperity Institute
Specific Examples: Objective 4, Giving
Resources New Life
Industrial ecology
Agricultural eco-industrial parks
• National Economic Technological Development
Area (NETD)63 in Zhengzhou, China is an agri-
industrial park. It produces small- or medium-sized
and low-emission farm vehicles and agricultural
machinery, and processes agricultural products
from regional rural areas. It also provides technical
guidance and information services to meet the
demand for rapid development of agriculture.
The Ideal
•
Agricultural Eco-Industrial Parks are still very much
a theoretical concept. The ideal park would
be a region of industrial symbiosis involving
various types of agriculture-related enterprises,
cooperative organizations, farmers, villages, and
farmland.

Recycling and composting
Green bin program
• The City of Guelph’s Green Bin Program64 CDN
collects 10,000 tonnes of food by-products each
year, diverting 32% of organics from landfill.
Nutrient recovery
• Ostara Nutrient Recovery Technology65 CDN is a
Vancouver-based company that recovers 85% of
the phosphorous and up to 15% of the nitrogen
in wastewater, transforming these recovered
materials into a high value fertilizer product called
‘Crystal Green’.
• Lystek Inc.66 CDN, contracted by the City of Guelph,
converts and manages the 4,500 tons of biosolids
generated each year by the city’s wastewater
treatment facility. It converts these biosolids into
commercially viable liquid organic fertilizer.
Re-appropriation of food waste

• Oreka Solutions67 CDN is a Wellington-based
company that collects food waste and feeds it to
black soldier flies. It then converts the flies into
three products: a solid fertilizer that enhances
the soil’s microbiome, a liquid biofertilizer for
aquaponic growing solutions, and a feedstock for
fish, pigs, and chickens.
• Agriprotein68 is a South African company that uses
Black Soldier fly larvae fed on discarded organic
waste material to produce highly nutritious feed,
nutrient rich compost, and oil.
• Orange Fiber69 uses 50% cellulose fibre from
orange peels collected from organic waste that
would otherwise be sent to landfill. The patented
fabric is being used by Italian brand Salvatore
Ferragamo.
• Arla Foods70, a dairy company in Scandinavia,
sends 100% of their food waste no longer fit for
human consumption from their largest factory to
animal feed instead of anaerobic digestion.
• BioBean71 in the UK is the first company to
industrialize the process of recycling waste coffee
grounds into biomass heating briquettes and
pellets. It heads the world’s first coffee recycling
factory72 and is researching biochemicals made
from coffee grounds.
• Loblaw73 CDN directs stale or expired grocery
goods to be used in the making of grain-based
animal feed.
The Ideal
•
Continued growth in each of these practices.
•
Directing nutrient flow from wastewater,
strengthening soils, and reducing reliance on
artificial fertilizers.
•
Improving access to green bin and composting
programs.