--- Lao People’s Democratic Republic − addressing labour ---

64 Lao People’s Democratic Republic − addressing labour scarcity through the gender-sensitive roll-out of drum seeders for rice Introduction FAO’s Regional Rice Initiative in Asia and the Pacific was launched as a pilot project in Indonesia, the Philippines and Lao People’s Democratic Republic. The project focused on the goods and services produced by rice ecosystems and landscapes, and aimed at identifying and implementing sustainable rice production practices to enhance resilience and improve efficiencies in rice production and thus improve food security. Pilot activities included training farmers in FFS on the Save and Grow-based sustainable intensification of rice production (SIRP).

The project was entitled Regional Rice Initiative: Curriculum Review, Consolidation and Results Assessment for Expansion of Save And Grow Farmers Field Schools in Lao PDR. Under the project, about 18 FFSs were organized in four provinces (Sayabouly, XiengKhuang, Savannakhet and Champasack) between 2016 and 2017 in a joint effort by the Laotian Government, smallholder farmers and FAO. In the province of Sayabouly, in the north-west of the country, smallholder farmers growing rice face problems of labour scarcity, especially during planting and harvesting periods. In the FFSs, smallholder farmers explored and field-tested labour-saving practices and technologies, including a drum seeder. The drum seeder supports two of the three CSA pillars. It increases labour productivity by allowing the direct seeding of rice, and increases the resilience of smallholder farmers to erratic weather.

Rationale Smallholder farmers who depend on agricultural production, including rice production, must increase the productivity of their operations and their incomes in order to strengthen their livelihoods. Smallholders face many challenges, including a decline in the availability of water and agricultural land, lower productivity, the loss of ecosystem goods and services, and droughts, floods and the spread of pests and diseases induced by climate change (Abubakar, Ketelaar and Minamiguchi, 2015). In addition, in Asia agriculture is shifting from traditional labour- intensive operations to mechanized operations on farms and along the value chain. This shift is due to various reasons, including rising labour scarcity in rural communities in Asia, increasing labour costs and the feminization of agriculture (FAO, 2014a). ©FAO/Mayling Flores Rojas