--- Page 86 ---

76 in rural Georgia (SDG 1). The development objective of the project is to stimulate investment in climate-smart agricultural value chains to increase incomes and strengthen the resilience of small farmers (SDG 13). The project is promoting CA to regenerate soils, for example by using compost and vermicompost and planting windbreaks of local tree species (SDG 15).

Overall, the project contributes to all three pillars of CSA:

Increasing productivity Agricultural productivity is improved as a result of various interventions of the project, including the rehabilitation of irrigation canals to boost the availability of irrigation water, the improvement of CSA practices, the strengthening of market linkages and targeted investments to boost farm production (greenhouses, drip irrigation, mechanization, quality seedlings, etc.).

Enhancing resilience The project has enhanced environmental sustainability by improving irrigation practices and soil health management at farm level, thus boosting the resilience of Georgia’s agriculture sector. A survey into the project’s outcomes for targeted households conducted in 2019 revealed that 48 percent of the beneficiaries of climate-smart grants reported that the quality of their harvests was better in 2018 than in 2016, compared with only 6 percent in the control group. The survey also showed that 30 percent of the households targeted by irrigation activities believed that the quality of their harvests had improved in 2017/18, against only 6 percent in the control group. The farmers that were targeted by the project irrigated a wider range of crop varieties than the control farmers. Climate-smart practices that improve soil resilience led to higher productivity and crop diversification, which has a positive effect on food security.

Reducing GHG emissions The AMMAR project has promoted sustainable agricultural production practices to help preserve soil and water resources, for example by proposing efficient irrigation techniques. The project proposed adaptation technologies featured in the publication Technologies for climate change adaptation – agriculture sector (Clements et al., 2011).

In particular, the project promoted the use of pressurized irrigation systems (sprinkler or drip) to improve water management and efficiency, as well as the adoption of CA systems (combining practices such as reduced or zero tilling, soil mulching, vermicomposting, crop rotation and diversification, and integrated nutrient and pest management) to improve soil fertility and soil carbon and water storage. The resulting reduction in the use of fossil fuels and increase in soil carbon has an important mitigation effect.

This case study was submitted by the Environment, Climate, Gender and Social Inclusion (ECG) and the Near East, North Africa, Europe and Central Asia (NEN) Divisions of IFAD. ecgmailbox@ifad.org.