--- Egypt – implementing the Sustainable Agriculture ---

57 Egypt – implementing the Sustainable Agriculture Investments and Livelihoods project Introduction IFAD’s Sustainable Agriculture Investments and Livelihoods (SAIL) project aims to contribute to the reduction of poverty and increase food and nutrition security for poor rural women and men in newly reclaimed lands in Egypt.

The project aims to enable small farmers in target areas to improve the profitability of their operations, diversify their livelihoods and increase their incomes. It is expected to contribute to CSA-related outcomes by reducing pressure on land and water resources, enhancing the productivity of natural resources in a sustainable way, and promoting the use of water- and energy-efficient technologies (IFAD, 2015).

SAIL’s three pillars are: community and livelihood development, agricultural development and diversification, and rural financial services. This case study focuses on how SAIL helps enhance financing options for CSA in Egypt.

The project helps smallholder farmers access capital by providing them with loans through a small and medium enterprise (SME) window and through microloans facilities. These loans allow communities to invest in CSA and diversify their livelihoods (e.g. by investing in livestock production or small off-farm enterprises) and thus improve their resilience. The rural finance component of SAIL complements investments in public infrastructure and training activities under other components and opens up opportunities to link with a broad range of private sector stakeholders.

The project is funded by IFAD and the GEF, with total financing amounting to USD 94.6 million. The project runs between 2015 and 2023 and is implemented by the Egyptian Ministry of Agriculture and Land Reclamation.

Rationale Egypt’s agricultural natural resources, including water, are increasingly exposed to climate variability and growing human pressures. Future climate change will likely exacerbate this problem and have significant impacts on inter alia hydraulic and agricultural ecosystems, as well as crucial socio-economic sectors – namely water, agriculture and health. The poorest people in rural areas are those that are most vulnerable to climate change; they are likely to be significantly affected by these evolutions. A sea level rise would reduce the area under cultivation in the Nile Delta and is likely to reduce agricultural production. The projected increase in temperature is expected to widen the gap between water availability and demands, and thus decrease overall agricultural productivity and increase competition over natural resources. Indeed, projected temperature rises in Egypt under climate change conditions are likely to increase crop water requirements, and thus directly decrease crop water use efficiency. Projections show significant reductions in the yields of wheat (down 11 to 12 percent), rice (down 26 to 47 percent) and maize ©IFAD/Umit Mansiz