--- The parties to the UNFCCC have established, under Article 13 of the Paris Agreement, an Enhanced Transparency ---

38 Cambodia and Mongolia – strengthening capacities in the agriculture, forestry and other land use sectors to improve the monitoring of and reporting on progress towards NDCs Introduction The Paris Agreement, which encourages countries to report on climate change mitigation and adaptation action under their NDCs, provides a useful basis for countries to plan, scale up and monitor CSA programmes. Like many developing countries, Cambodia and Mongolia acknowledge the importance of the agriculture sector for economic development, as well as the risks posed by climate change to the sector. Thus, both countries have included priority actions for climate change adaptation and mitigation in the agriculture and other land use sectors in their NDCs.

The parties to the UNFCCC have established, under Article 13 of the Paris Agreement, an Enhanced Transparency Framework (ETF) to build confidence that developed and developing countries alike are making progress towards the priorities outlined in their NDCs. To meet the requirements of the ETF to monitor and report on programmes of action, particularly in the agriculture sector, many countries require improved institutional and technical capacities to collect, analyse and report data in a transparent manner. To address these capacity needs, the Capacity Building Initiative for Transparency (CBIT) was established under the Paris Agreement, with the support of the GEF. With help from FAO, the Governments of Cambodia and Mongolia are working with CBIT to strengthen their capacities to measure, report and verify adaptation and mitigation actions in the agriculture, forestry and other land use (AFOLU) sectors from 2019 to 2022.

Rationale Mongolia’s landscapes range from mountains and forest steppe to pastureland steppe and desert regions. The country’s climate is increasingly characterized by temperature and precipitation extremes. Annual mean temperatures range from -8 °C to +6 °C, while annual precipitation varies from 50 mm in the Gobi Desert to 400 mm in the northern mountainous areas. Mongolia is highly dependent on its agriculture and other land use sectors, which together contribute more than 18 percent to national GDP and employ around 40 percent of the labour force. Within the AFOLU sectors, the livestock sector dominates, accounting for 84.9 percent of total agricultural production. Observed climate trends include increased average temperatures, changes in precipitation patterns and an increased frequency of extremes, such as the combination of droughts and harsh winters (dzud). These trends pose significant risks to rural livelihoods. ©FAO/Khangaikhuu Purevragchaa