--- Ecuadorian Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock, together with the Ministry of the Environment and Water, ---

70 Ecuador – promoting climate-smart livestock management and cocoa production Introduction In Ecuador, FAO is providing technical support to promote climate-smart livestock management and cocoa production. These sectors present important opportunities to increase the productivity and incomes of farmers, help them adapt to climate change and contribute to the reduction of GHG emissions.

Recognizing the social and economic relevance, but also the environmental impacts of cattle production, the Ecuadorian Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock, together with the Ministry of the Environment and Water, has developed the Climate-Smart Livestock Management, Integrating Reversion of Land Degradation and Reduction of Desertification Risks in Vulnerable Provinces project, with support from FAO.28 The project has been operational since 2016 in seven provinces of the country (Guayas, Santa Elena, Manabí, Imbabura, Loja, Napo and Morona Santiago), with funds provided by the GEF.

The project Strengthening the Climate-Smart Approach for Cocoa Production under the Chakra Agroforestry System in the Napo Province in Ecuador has been developed within the framework of the International Alliance for Climate-Smart Agriculture. It is being implemented since November 2019 by FAO, with funding provided by the Italian Ministry of the Environment and the Protection of the Territory and the Sea.

Rationale Ecuador’s agriculture sector accounted for 7.82  percent of the country’s GDP in 2018, with the livestock sector accounting for 6.97 percent of this share (Central Bank of Ecuador, 2018). Cattle farming in Ecuador is predominantly extensive. It is estimated that there were 4.05 million of cattle heads (equivalent to 67.26 percent of the total livestock) and 4.23 million hectares of natural and cultivated grassland in the country in 2016 for an approximate animal load of 0.68 AU/ha (Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean, 2016; Ecuador, Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock, n.d.). Meanwhile, Ecuador accounts for 6.7 percent of global cocoa production (International Cocoa Organization, 2021). Most cocoa farmers cultivate plots that are smaller than 5 ha.

There is a significant potential to increase productivity and reduce GHG emissions from cattle farming in Ecuador.

The sector is currently inefficient. It occupies large areas of poorly managed pastures, while CO2eq emissions 28 For a video on the project, see https://youtu.be/It10qkmKC5s (FAO, 2021d). ©FAO/Natalia Rivas