--- their NDCs to the Paris Agreement. ---

18 IFAD is committed to increase its financing to support smallholders adapt to the effects of climate change. The organization aligns its programmes to the targets on climate change mitigation and adaptation set by countries in their NDCs to the Paris Agreement.

Outcomes Study findings The study helps fill a knowledge gap by identifying over 80 CSA practices. A compendium to the study report (forthcoming) provides short descriptions of over 60  practices, classified into seven major categories (crops, livestock, energy, soils, water, forestry and aquaculture) with various subcategories. Many of the practices fit in with the three pillars of CSA. They have the potential to increase productivity and incomes, enhance resilience and adaptation, and reduce GHG emissions.

The findings of the study demonstrate the potential to change agricultural practices to reduce farmers’ vulnerability to the effects of climate change. Most of the CSA practices applied by rural women concern crop production.

Practices with a strong potential to increase production and resilience include the use of indigenous crop varieties that resist droughts and diseases, practising crop rotation to keep soils fertile, and using traditional methods to store seed. Several farmers said that they listened to weather forecasts on the radio to time the preparation of their fields.

This finding suggests that the radio is a good way to disseminate information on CSA practices.

None of the women included in the study engage in nomadic herding, which is considered a job for men. However, women take care of livestock around the homestead. They feed their animals by fencing off land for grazing, growing fodder crops such as alfalfa and Sudan grass, and collecting wild fodder plants. Such adaptive practices help farmers cope with the dwindling of grassland resources due to drought.

The study revealed different perceptions of gender roles. Some women argued that irrigation is the responsibility of men, while others said that both women and men undertake tasks linked to irrigation. Irrigation enables farmers to grow food during the off season and in times of drought.

Several focus groups ranked agricultural practices according to their importance for the community. For example, focus groups in Galkayo ranked herd and grazing management, water storage and fodder production as their top priorities.

Many practices with the potential to increase the resilience of households are not applied. Several groups were aware of soil conservation practices such as erosion control measures and conservation agriculture, but stated that these are rarely applied.

The study further identified various constraints that hinder the wider adoption of CSA practices. Discussion groups highlighted the need for training, and argued that essential services − such as extension or veterinary services − are lacking. Interviews with experts revealed that rural women are often excluded from decision-making processes, are not allowed to possess fixed assets and do not hold the required financial capital.

Designing gender-sensitive projects to increase resilience The study findings are of great value for organizations such as IFAD that fund agricultural projects in Somalia, especially in their efforts to promote progress towards achieving SDG 1 (No poverty) and SDG 2 (Zero hunger). It is important to leverage the current evidence base for CSA (action point 1) to provide information for future projects (including all other action points).

The study confirms that IFAD programmes should support rural women as a key target group to work towards SDG 5 (Gender equality). Women have important and diverse roles in agriculture and are key players in rural households in terms of adaptation to climate change. As cultural norms may hamper the participation of women in projects, project designers should consider using specific methodologies to target women farmers, such as the Gender Action Learning System (GALS).9 9 For more information on GALS, see for example http://www.fao.org/3/cb1331en/cb1331en-01.pdf.