--- Page 25 ---

15
Strong collaboration between farmers, extension service providers, climate and weather forecasting institutions and
researchers is essential to explore options and find solutions to cope with the vagaries of climate change.
The research in Senegal described in this chapter was carried out to support the above-mentioned GEF project and
identify important elements to strengthen the FFS learning process.
Among the main climate-related challenges faced by farmers in the intervention area (the Groundnut Basin, eastern Senegal
and the agro-sylvo-pastoral zone) are the unpredictability of rainfall (early start and end of the rain season, delay of the winter
season, rain out of season, rainfall breaks, floods), which impacts the water requirements of key crops; temperature rises
(resulting in dry spells and droughts), which impact the temperature requirements of key crops and animals; and strong
winds (which result in land erosion, destroy plants and increase the rate of moisture evaporation from the soil).
Description
The research examined farmers’ perceptions and attitudes about climate change and climate variability to uncover
the knowledge base of farmers’ agricultural choices and practices. Climate change has always existed, and farmers
have always adapted their choices to this change.
The objectives of the research were to:

capture farmers’ knowledge, perceptions and attitudes regarding climate change, climate variability and
their impact on production as well as local adaptation strategies at the community level;

pass on valuable knowledge from farmers to project managers, extension service providers and climate or
weather forecast institutes (e.g. the Agence Nationale de l’Aviation Civile et de la Météorologie or Senegalese
national agency for civil aviation and meteorology);

test a research methodology to be used in projects on climate change adaptation using FFS and other
participatory methodologies.
The research methodology included interviews, transect walks in communities and focus groups. The focus groups
consisted of either male or female farmers, of one of four ethnic groups (Peul, Serer, Mandinka and Wolof). The
farmers worked in one of two agro-climatic zones: the Groundnut Basin and the sylvo-pastoral zone.
The research project examined:

farmers’ perception of their villages’ zones, based on their agro-ecological characteristics, land use and the
value of these zones in terms of ecosystem services provided;

key climatic events and their impacts on the different zones of the villages;

villages’ vulnerabilities, based on the impacts of extreme climatic events in terms of human and animal
diseases, living expenses and livelihood activities;

resilience and adaptation capacity, considering climate and meteorological predictors, resilient species and practices.
The research was inserted into the above-mentioned GEF project, which established two key pathways to translate
the evidence and results of the investigation into actions. The first pathway is the mainstreaming and adoption
of the FFS approach and climate change adaptation practices into the Senegalese national agricultural extension
agency (or Agence Nationale de Conseil Agricole et Rural). The second pathway is the establishment of a resilience
fund within the national fund for agro-sylvo-pastoral development (or Fonds National de Développement Agro-
Sylvo-Pastoral) to finance community development plans and climate change adaptation plans proposed by farmer
organizations with the support of the extension agents.
Outcomes
This research project contributes to the SDGs’ overarching goal of “leaving no one behind” by providing insight
into communities’ basic needs for protecting the environment and landscape and improving livelihoods. This
knowledge may support community development planning as well as FFS activities in the region. Indeed, the study
helps improve FFS activities by: