--- 3. Opportunities and Challenges in Embracing Circular Regenerative Agricultural ---

Agronomy 2024, 14, 2423 7 of 15 circumstances, combining compost with liquid manure has been reported to produce better results than either of the two when applied alone, in terms of improvements in the soil structure, soil fertility, crop growth and vigor, leaf color intensity and maize yields [71].

On the other hand, promising results have been reported when farm yard manure has been combined with a reduced dose of mineral fertilizer. A study in Ethiopia showed that the combined application of FYM with half of the recommended mineral nitrogen and phosphorus fertilizer increased the grain yield of the crop by 185 and 170%, respectively, over the control treatment [72]. A different study by Laub et al. [73] concluded that, at realistic application rates, the maize yield is best sustained by the combined application of farmyard manure and mineral N in integrated soil fertility management. 3. Opportunities and Challenges in Embracing Circular Regenerative Agricultural Practices in Africa Circular agriculture has three key principles, namely (a) preserving and enhancing natural resources, (b) the efficient use of resources and (c) multipurpose use and recovery from waste. Each of these areas offers unique opportunities for both farmers and communi- ties to further the concept of circularity in agricultural production. This is because each of these key principles has been involved in an interplay with agricultural production systems in SSA for generations. The region now requires the coordinated harnessing of emerging technologies that offer more opportunities for agricultural production, manufacturing and waste management, so as to improve livelihoods and achieve poverty reduction in SSA.

A World Bank report estimates that, with its fast-growing population, waste generation in the SSA is expected to triple by the year 2050 [74]. Since SSA is characterized by middle- to low-income countries, the proportion of organic waste in the overall amount of municipal waste is relatively higher than in more developed regions of the world. SSA currently produces around 54 and 56% of all food and green waste, respectively, compared to only about 32% of the total waste produced in high-income countries and cities [74,75]. This highlights the great potential of the third principle of agricultural circularity—multipurpose use and recovery from waste. Most of the organic fraction of waste can be converted to fertilizer using affordable technology. Instead of burying such waste in landfills or subjecting it into open burning or dumping, the authorities should seize the opportunity and the potential for its conversion into organic fertilizer using simple technologies such as composting. One study in Arusha, Tanzania reported that the energy contained in municipal solid waste generated in Arusha was equivalent to about 30% and 67% of the energy contained in coal and pure biomass [76]. The utilization of energy in the form of heat, electricity or steam can lead to better energy recovery and protect the environment from toxic emissions. A recent study that aimed at evaluating four prospective waste- to-energy options, namely incineration, anaerobic digestion, gasification and landfill gas, found that producing 200 MW of energy using biogas cost 36% less, potentially resulting in monthly savings of USD 5.46 million for Ghana. This highlights anaerobic digestion as a superior option, offering renewable energy production, valuable bio-product creation and a comparatively lower greenhouse gas emission effect [77]. This is an exemplary option that other cities across SSA could invest in to achieve circularity in agriculture.

One of the greatest challenges facing most SSA countries is the prevailing practice of generating and accumulating heterogeneous waste and disposing of it in designated areas without prior segregation according to the type of waste [77,78]. This is an unsustainable practice that makes it difficult to implement any of the waste management options men- tioned above. Another challenge in the use of biomass to develop sustainable bioenergy is the absence of a clearly documented or traceable biomass value chain that would ensure a constant supply of biomass to fuel energy production machinery in most SSA countries.

Apart from the problems associated with the absence of waste separation schemes, and hence inappropriate waste disposal, other challenges impeding the waste-to-energy approach in most of SSA include ineffective waste collection methods, a lack of suitable waste-to-Energy (WtE) generation technology in place, a lack of financial support and