--- is intrinsically linked to Water, Land and Soil, Climate and Communities Principles. ---

SUSTAINABLE AGRICULTURE
PRINCIPLES & PRACTICES
5

Nature
PRINCIPLE
An agricultural sector that maintains and enhances the
biodiversity of the area as well as surrounding ecosystems,
promotes the health of pollinators, ensures diversity of genetic
material (commercial and wild) and hinders invasive species.
CONTEXT
Agriculture is both a beneficiary and
provider of biodiversity and related
ecosystem services. Diverse, healthy
agricultural landscapes provide habitat
to flora and fauna, purify air and water,
and provide climate change mitigation
and carbon sequestration. In turn,
agriculture benefits from soil erosion
control, important services from wildlife
such as pollination and pest management,
and a source of genetic diversity for plants
and livestock, as well as food, fuel, fibre,
water, and medicinal resources.
PRACTICES
Nature encompasses natural ecosystems as well as biodiversity on the farm and
is intrinsically linked to Water, Land and Soil, Climate and Communities Principles.
Practices which support nature include:
• Minimise deforestation and avoid deforestation in ecologically sensitive areas.
• Provide provisions for wildlife habitats and food sources.
• Enhance the environment for locally important, rare and endangered species
by providing appropriate habitats.
• Minimise the negative impacts of operations such as use of agri-chemicals,
ploughing, grass cutting and hedge cutting.
• Restore vegetation in degraded areas that have been prone to loss of fertility
or soil erosion, preferably by using native species.
• Create biodiversity habitats that encourage natural enemies of pests and contribute
to their control by biological rather than chemical means.
• Implement management systems that are adapted to local conditions.
• Ensure invasive species are not planted.
• Maintain and use genetically diverse plant material and livestock, as appropriate
for the region and markets.
• Work with local communities to promote regional initiatives.
• Ensure awareness and protection of endangered species, by training farmer,
workers and the local community.
SUPPORTING THE SDGs