--- PRINCIPLES & PRACTICES ---

SUSTAINABLE AGRICULTURE
PRINCIPLES & PRACTICES
7

Communities
PRINCIPLE
An agricultural sector that supports resilient farming communities,
by contributing to the local economy, ensuring land conversion
does not result in forced resettlement, fair use of shared resources,
respecting traditional land use and land rights, building trust
throughout the value chain and supporting next generation farming.
PRACTICES
Supporting resilient farming communities is fundamental to long-term sustainability
and is linked to the Livelihood Principle as well as Working and Living Conditions.
Practices which support communities include:
• Ensure activities provide, where possible, economic benefits to local communities.
• Build trust amongst all actors in the value chain.
• Support collaborative efforts with the local community, such as education
and training, infrastructure development, and catchment approach to
environmental challenges.
• Support local efforts in recruitment of permanent and temporary workers.
• Identify and address any conflicting resource use demands (e.g. land or water).
• Ensure any land conversion does not require forced resettlement or negatively
impact the community.
• Respect the traditional land use of the area and ensure land rights are recognised.
• Contribute to efforts that encourage and support young and diverse farmers.
CONTEXT
The rural, often isolated, nature of
farming creates specific challenges.
Farming communities are often limited
in their access to education, healthcare,
and mental health resources. Conflicts
arise between cultural groups when
land is obtained through involuntary
resettlement or coercion, and/or
communities are no longer able to access
land that is relevant for cultural practices.
Increasingly, youth are choosing to move
from rural to urban areas, especially where
barriers to entering the agricultural sector
exist. Growing the agricultural workforce
and ensuring long-term sustainability
of farming communities is contingent
upon improving labour conditions
and livelihoods, creating mutually
respectful relationships with indigenous
communities, and strengthening
financial and entrepreneurial resources.
SUPPORTING
THE SDGs